Table of Contents

N’atthi me saraṇaṃ aññaṃ,

Saṅgho me saraṇaṃ varaṃ

Etena sacca-vajjena

Hotu te† jaya-maṅgalaṃ.

Yaṅ kiñci ratanaṃ loke

Vijjati vividhaṃ puthu

Ratanaṃ Buddha-samaṃ n’atthi Tasmā sotthī bhavantu te†.
Yaṅ kiñci ratanaṃ loke

Vijjati vividhaṃ puthu

Dhamma-cakkappavattana Sutta

Ratanaṃ Dhamma-samaṃ n’atthi Tasmā sotthī bhavantu te†.

Discourse on Setting in Motion the Wheel of the Dhamma
Introduction Chant . . . . . . . . . . . page 1
Sutta and Translation . . . . . . . . . page 2

Yaṅ kiñci ratanaṃ loke

Vijjati vividhaṃ puthu

Ratanaṃ Saṅgha-samaṃ n’atthi

Tasmā sotthī bhavantu te†.

Sakkatvā Buddha-ratanaṃ,

Osathaṃ uttamaṃ varaṃ;

Anatta-lakkhaṇa Sutta

Hitaṃ deva-manussānaṃ,

Buddha-tejena sotthinā;

Discourse on the Characteristic of Non-self.
Introduction Chant . . . . . . . . . . . page 12
Sutta and Translation . . . . . . . . . page 12 & 13

Nassant’upaddavā sabbe,

Dukkhā vūpasamentu te†.

Sakkatvā Dhamma-ratanaṃ,

Osathaṃ uttamaṃ varaṃ;

Pariḷāhūpasamanaṃ,

Dhamma-tejena sotthinā;

Āditta-pariyāya Sutta

Nassant’upaddavā sabbe,

Bhayā vūpasamentu te†.

The Fire Sermon
Introduction Chant . . . . . . . . . . . page 22
Sutta and Translation . . . . . . . . . page 22 & 23

Sakkatvā Saṅgha-ratanaṃ,

Osathaṃ uttamaṃ varaṃ;

Āhuneyyaṃ pāhuneyyaṃ,

Saṅgha-tejena sotthinā;

Nassant’upaddavā sabbe,

Rogā vūpasamentu te†.

Sabb’ītiyo vivajjantu,

Sabba-rogo vinassatu;

Mā te bhavatv-antarāyo,

Sukhī dīgh’āyuko bhava.

Abhivādana-sīlissa,

Niccaṃ vuḍḍhā’pacāyino;

Cattāro dhammā vaḍḍhanti,

Āyu vaṇṇo sukhaṃ balaṃ.

Āṭānāṭiya Paritta
The ‘Twenty-Eight Buddhas’ Auspicious Blessing Chant
Introduction Chant . . . . . . . . . . . page 30
Paritta and Translation . . . . . . . . . page 30 & 31

Āṭānāṭiya Parittaṃ Niṭṭhitaṃ.

I have no other refuge—the Sangha is my excellent refuge,
With this declaration of truth may you celebrate victory.
Whatever jewel is found in the world, manifest and plentiful,
It is not equal to the Buddha—therefore may you be blessed.

Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta

Whatever jewel is found in the world, manifest and plentiful,
It is not equal to the Dhamma—therefore may you be blessed.

Solo introduction:

Whatever jewel is found in the world, manifest and plentiful,
It is not equal to the Sangha—therefore may you be blessed.

Paṭhamaṃ yaṃ adesesi

Dhammacakkaṃ anuttaraṃ

Sammadeva pavattento

Loke appaṭivattiyaṃ

Having revered the Buddha-jewel, the balm supreme, excellent,
For the good of devas and humans, by the Buddha’s blessed
power,
May all ills be destroyed, all your sorrows assuaged.
Having revered the Dhamma-jewel, the balm supreme, excellent,
Suppressing fever, by the Dhamma's blessed power,
May all ills be destroyed, all your fears be allayed.
Having revered the Sangha-jewel, the balm supreme, excellent,
Worthy of gifts, of hospitality, by the Sangha's blessed power,
May all ills be destroyed, may all your sickness perish.

Yatthākkhātā ubho antā

Paṭipatti ca majjhimā

Catūsvāriyasaccesu

Visuddhaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ

Desitaṃ dhammarājena

Sammāsambodhikittanaṃ

Nāmena vissutaṃ suttaṃ

Dhammacakkappavattanam

Veyyākaraṇapāthena

Saṅgītantambhaṇāma se.

May there be no hindrance for you, may you be happy and
long-lived.
Being one of devout character, respecting the elders,
Four things will increase for you:
long life, beauty, happiness and strength.
~•~

Anuttaraṃ abhisambodhiṃ Sambujjhitvā Tathāgato

This is the first teaching of the Tathāgata on attaining to unexcelled, perfect enlightenment. Here is the perfect turning
of the incomparable wheel of truth, inestimable wherever it
is expounded in the world. Disclosed here are the two extremes, and the middle way, with the four noble truths and
the purified knowledge and vision pointed out by the Lord of
Dhamma. Let us chant together this sutta proclaiming the supreme, independent enlightenment that is widely renowned
as The Turning of the Wheel of the Dhamma.

Discourse on Setting in Motion
the Wheel of the Dhamma
Thus have I heard: Once, the Blessed One was staying in
the Deer Park at Isipatana, near Baranasi. There the
Blessed One addressed the group of five bhikkhus:
There are two extremes, bhikkhus, which should not be
followed by one who has gone forth from the worldly life:
sensual indulgence, which is low, course, vulgar, ignoble
and unprofitable; and self-torment, which is painful,
ignoble and unprofitable. Bhikkhus, by avoiding these two
extremes the Tathāgata has realised the Middle Way that
gives vision and understanding, and leads to peace, higher
wisdom, enlightenment and nibbāna.
And what is the middle way realised by the Tathāgata,
which gives vision and understanding, and leads to peace,
higher wisdom, enlightenment and nibbāna? It is this—
the Noble Eightfold Path, namely, right understanding
(sammā diṭṭhi), right intention (sammā saṅkappo) right
speech (sammā vācā), right action (sammā kammanto),
right livelihood (sammā ājīvo), right effort (sammā
vāyāmo), right mindfulness (sammā sati) and right
concentration (sammā samādhi). This, bhikkhus, is the
middle way realised by the Tathāgata, which gives vision
and understanding, and leads to peace, higher wisdom,
enlightenment and nibbāna.
Now this, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of dukkha (unsatisfactoriness): birth is dukkha; ageing is dukkha; and death
is dukkha; sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair are
dukkha; association with the unloved is dukkha; separation from the loved is dukkha;

Sayane āsane ṭhāne

Gamane cāpi sabbadā.

Sadā sukhena rakkhantu

Buddhā santi-karā tuvaṃ

Tehi tvaṃ rakkhito santo

Mutto sabba-bhayena ca.

Sabba-roga-vinimutto

Sabba-santāpa-vajjito

Sabba-veram-atikkanto

Nibbuto ca tuvaṃ bhava.

Tesaṃ saccena sīlena

Khanti-mettā-balena ca

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

Ārogyena sukhena ca.

Puratthimasmiṃ disā-bhāge

Santi bhūtā mah’iddhikā

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

Ārogyena sukhena ca.

Dakkhiṇasmiṃ disā-bhāge

Santi devā mah’iddhikā

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

Ārogyena sukhena ca.

Pacchimasmasmiṃ disā-bhāge Santi nāgā mah’iddhikā
Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu
Uttarasmiṃ disā-bhāge

Ārogyena sukhena ca.
Santi yakkhā mah’iddhikā

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

Ārogyena sukhena ca.

Purima-disaṃ Dhataraṭṭho

Dakkhiṇena Viruḷhako

Pacchimena Virūpakkho

Kuvero uttaraṃ disaṃ.

Cattāro te mahā-rājā

Loka-pālā yasassino

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

Ārogyena sukhena ca.

Ākāsaṭṭhā ca bhummaṭṭhā

Devā nāgā mah’iddhikā

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

Ārogyena sukhena ca.

N’atthi me saraṇaṃ aññaṃ,

Buddho me saraṇaṃ varaṃ

Etena sacca-vajjena

Hotu te† jaya-maṅgalaṃ

N’atthi me saraṇaṃ aññaṃ,

Dhammo me saraṇaṃ varaṃ

Etena sacca-vajjena

Hotu te† jaya-maṅgalaṃ

If chanting for oneself change: * to amhe; change † to me.

Lying, sitting, standing, walking, indeed everywhere,
May the calm-making Buddhas always protect you with bliss,
And you, protected by them, freed from all fear,
Freed from all illness, freed from all torments,
Having gone beyond hatred, may you attain Nibbāna.
By the truth of these things, by discipline, patience and the
power of loving-kindness,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
In the eastern direction are beings of mighty power,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
In the southern direction are beings of mighty power,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
In the western direction are beings of mighty power,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
In the northern direction are beings of mighty power,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
The east is ruled by Dhataraṭṭha, the south by Viruḷhaka,
The west by Virūpakkha, Kuvera rules the north,
These four Great Kings are the far-famed guardians of the world,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
Devas of the sky and earth, nāgas of mighty power,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
I have no other refuge—the Buddha is my excellent refuge,
With this declaration of truth may you celebrate victory.
I have no other refuge—the Dhamma is my excellent refuge,
With this declaration of truth may you celebrate victory.

Dhamma-cakkappavattana Sutta
[Evam-me sutaṃ.] Ekaṃ samayaṃ Bhagavā,
Bārāṇasiyaṃ viharati Isipatane Migadāye. Tatra kho
Bhagavā pañca-vaggiye bhikkhū āmantesi:
“Dve’me bhikkhave antā pabbajitena na sevitabbā. Yo
cāyaṃ kāmesu kāma-sukh’allikānuyogo, hīno gammo
pothujjaniko anariyo anattha-sañhito, yo cāyaṃ attakilamathānuyogo, dukkho anariyo anattha-sañhito.
Ete’te bhikkhave ubho ante anupagamma, majjhimā
paṭipadā Tathāgatena abhi-sambuddhā, cakkhu-karaṇī
ñāṇa-karaṇī upasamāya abhiññāya sambodhāya
nibbānāya saṃvattati.
Katamā ca sā bhikkhave majjhimā paṭipadā Tathāgatena
abhisambuddhā, cakkhu-karaṇī ñāṇa-karaṇī upasamāya
abhiññāya sam-bodhāya nibbānāya saṃvattati? Ayameva ariyo aṭṭh’aṅgiko maggo, seyyathīdaṃ, sammā-diṭṭhi
sammā-saṅkappo, sammā-vācā sammā-kammanto
sammā-ājīvo, sammā- vāyāmo sammā-sati sammāsamādhi. Ayaṃ kho sā bhikkhave majjhimā paṭipadā
Tathāgatena abhisambuddhā, cakkhu-karaṇī
ñāṇa-karaṇī upasamāya abhiññāya sam-bodhāya
nibbānāya saṃvattati.
Idaṃ kho pana bhikkhave dukkhaṃ ariya-saccaṃ: Jāti
pi dukkhā jarā pi dukkhā maraṇam pi dukkhaṃ, sokaparideva-dukkha-domanass’upāyāsā pi dukkhā, appiyehi
sampayogo dukkho, piyehi vippayogo dukkho,

not attaining one’s wishes is dukkha; in brief, the five categories of the grasping mind* are dukkha.
Now this, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of the origin of
dukkha: it is the craving that conditions renewal of being,
which is accompanied by passionate pleasure, and takes delight in this and that object: namely, sensual craving; craving to become; craving for annihilation. Now this, bhikkhus,
is the noble truth of the cessation of dukkha: it is the complete and passionless cessation of that craving; giving it up,
abandoning it, being released and detached from it. Now
this, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of the way leading to the
cessation of dukkha: it is this—the noble eightfold path,
namely: right understanding, right intention, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration.
1. (i) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of dukkha,”
there arose in me vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom,
light, concerning things unknown before.
(ii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of dukkha,
and this has to be understood,” there arose in me vision,
knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things
unknown before.
(iii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of dukkha,
and this dukkha has been understood,” there arose in me vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things
unknown before.
2. (i) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the
source of dukkha,” there arose in me vision, knowledge,
insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
(ii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the source
of dukkha, and this source has to be abandoned,” there
arose in me vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.

Padumo loka-pajjoto

Nārado vara-sārathī

Padum’uttaro satta-sāro

Sumedho appaṭipuggalo.

Sujāto sabba-lok’aggo

Piya-dassī nar’āsabho

Attha-dassī kāruṇiko

Dhamma-dassī tamo-nudo.

Siddhattho asamo loke

Tisso ca vadataṃ varo

Pusso ca varado Buddho

Vipassī ca anūpamo.

Sikhī sabba-hito satthā

Vessabhū sukha-dāyako

Kakusandho sattha-vāho

Konāgamano raṇañ-jaho.

Kassapo siri-sampanno

Gotamo sakya-puṅgavo.

Ete c’aññe ca Sambuddhā

Aneka-sata-koṭayo

Sabbe Buddhā asama-samā

Sabbe Buddhā mah’iddhikā.

Sabbe dasa-balūpetā

Vesārajjeh’upāgatā

Sabbe te paṭijānanti

Āsabhaṇṭhānam’uttamaṃ.

Sīha-nādaṃ nadant’ete

Parisāsu visāradā

Brahma-cakkaṃ pavattenti

Loke appaṭivattiyaṃ.

Upetā Buddha-dhammehi

Aṭṭhārasahi nāyakā

Dvattiṃsa-lakkhaṇūpetā

Sītyānubyañjanā-dharā.

Byāmappabhāya suppabhā

Sabbe te muni-kuñjarā

Buddhā sabbañ-ñuno ete

Sabbe khīṇ’āsavā jinā.

Mahappabhā mahā-tejā

Mahā-paññā mahabbalā

Mahā-kāruṇikā dhīrā

Sabbesānaṃ sukhā-vahā.

Dīpā nāthā patiṭṭhā ca

Tāṇā leṇā ca pāṇinaṃ

Gatī bandhū mah’assāsā

Saraṇā ca hitesino.

Sadevakassa lokassa

Sabbe ete parāyanā

*Form (rūpa), feeling (vedanā), perception (saññā), mental forma-

Tesāhaṃ sirasā pāde

Vandāmi puris’uttame.

Vacasā manasā c’eva

Vandām’ete Tathāgate

tions (saṅkhārā), consciousness (viññāṇa).

Padumo, light of the world, Nārado, true charioteer,
Padumuttaro, the perfect being, Sumedho, without compare,
Sujāto, peak of all the world, Piyadassī, great among humans,
Atthadassī, the compassionate, Dhammadassī, dispeller of
darkness,
Siddhatto, incomparable in the world, Tisso, excellent in
speech,
Pusso Buddha, giver of the best, Vipassī, without equal,
Sikhī, the all-benefiting teacher, Vessabhū, the giver of bliss,
Kakusandho, the caravan leader, Konāgamano, who turns
away from turbulent passions,
Kassapo, abounding in glory, Gotamo, leader of the Sakyans.
These and other Supreme Buddhas, many hundred thousands,
All Buddhas, peerless, of mighty power,
All endowed with ten powers, having attained perfect confidence,
All hold the leading supreme position,
They roar the lion’s roar with confidence in the assemblies,
They turn the excellent wheel that cannot be turned back,
Leaders endowed with the 18 Buddha attributes,
Bearers of the 32 marks and 80 minor marks,
With a six-foot halo shining bright, all these chiefs among sages,
These all-knowing Buddhas, all Arahants, conquerors,
Of great light, ardour, wisdom and power,
With great compassion, wise bringers of bliss to all,
Lamps, guides, supports, shelters, and protectors of beings,
Comforting kinsmen on the way, protectors and well-wishers,
All the highest peak of this world with its devas,
Them I salute, highest of beings, with my head at their feet,
With voice and heart alike I salute these Tathāgatas,

yam-p’icchaṃ na labhati tam pi dukkhaṃ, saṅkhittena
pañc’upādānakkhandhā dukkhā. Idaṃ kho pana bhikkhave
dukkha-samudayo ariya-saccaṃ: Yā’yaṃ taṇhā
ponobbhavikā nandi-rāga-sahagatā tatra-tatrābhinandinī,
seyyathīdaṃ, kāma-taṇhā bhava-taṇhā vibhava-taṇhā.
Idaṃ kho pana bhikkhave dukkha-nirodho ariya-saccaṃ:
Yo tassā yeva taṇhāya asesa-virāga-nirodho cāgo paṭinissaggo mutti anālayo. Idaṃ kho pana bhikkhave dukkhanirodha-gāminī-paṭipadā ariya-saccaṃ: ayam-eva ariyo
aṭṭh’aṅgiko maggo, seyyathīdaṃ, sammā-diṭṭhi
sammā-saṅkappo, sammā-vācā sammā-kammanto
sammā-ājīvo, sammā-vāyāmo sammā-sati sammā-samādhi.
[Idaṃ dukkhaṃ] ariya-saccan-ti me bhikkhave, pubbe
ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuṃ udapādi ñāṇaṃ
udapādi paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi. Taṃ
kho pan’idaṃ dukkhaṃ ariya-saccaṃ pariññeyyan- ti me
bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuṃ
udapādi ñāṇaṃ udapādi paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko
udapādi. Taṃ kho pan’idaṃ dukkhaṃ ariya-saccaṃ
pariññātan-ti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu
dhammesu, cakkhuṃ udapādi ñāṇaṃ udapādi paññā
udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi.
Idaṃ dukkha-samudayo ariya-saccan-ti me bhikkhave,
pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuṃ udapādi ñāṇaṃ
udapādi paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi. Taṃ
kho pan’idaṃ dukkha-samudayo ariya-saccaṃ pahātabbanti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuṃ
udapādi ñāṇaṃ udapādi paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko

Solo Introduction:
(iii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the
source of dukkha, and this source of dukkha has been
abandoned,” there arose in me vision, knowledge, insight,
wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.

Appasannehi nāthassa

Sāsane sādhu-sammate

Amanussehi caṇḍehi

Sadā kibbi-sakāribhi

Parisānañ-ca tassanna-

-m-ahiṃsāya ca guttiyā

3. ( i) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the
cessation of dukkha,” there arose in me vision, knowledge,
insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
(ii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the
cessation of dukkha, and this cessation of dukkha has to be
realised,” there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge,
insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
(iii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the
cessation of dukkha, and this cessation of dukkha has been
realised,” there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge,
insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.

Yan-desesi mahā-vīro

Parittan-tam-bhaṇāma se.

4. (i) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the way
leading to the cessation of dukkha,” there arose in me,
bhikkhus, vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
(ii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the way
leading to the cessation of dukkha, and this way has to be
developed,” there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown
before.
(iii) With the thought: ”This is the noble truth of the way
leading to the cessation of dukkha, and this way has been
developed,” there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown
before.
So long, bhikkhus, as my knowledge and vision of reality
regarding these four noble truths, in these three phases
—these twelve aspects—was not fully clear to me,

Āṭānāṭiya Parittaṃ
[Vipassissa nam’atthu,]

Cakkhumantassa sirīmato;

Sikhissa pi nam’atthu,

Sabba-bhūtānukampino.

Vessabhussa nam’atthu,

Nhātakassa tapassino;

Nam’atthu Kakusandhassa,

Māra-senappamaddino,

Konāgamanassa nam’atthu,

Brāhmaṇassa vusīmato;

Kassapassa nam’atthu,

Vippamuttassa sabbadhi.

Aṅgīrasassa nam’atthu,

Sakya-puttassa sirīmato;

Yo imaṃ dhammam-adesesi,

Sabba-dukkhāpanūdanaṃ.

Ye cāpi nibbutā loke,

Yathā-bhūtaṃ vipassisuṃ;

Te janā apisuṇā,

Mahantā vīta-sāradā.

Hitaṃ deva-manussānaṃ,

Yaṃ namassanti Gotamaṃ;

Vijjā-caraṇa-sampannaṃ,

Mahantaṃ vīta-sāradaṃ.

Vijjā-caraṇa-sampannaṃ,

Buddhaṃ vandāma Gotaman-ti.

[Namo me sabba buddhānaṃ] Uppannānaṃ mahesinaṃ
Taṇhaṅ-karo mahā-vīro

Medhaṅ-karo mahā-yaso.

Saraṇaṅ-karo loka-hito

Dīpaṅ-karo jutin-dharo

Koṇḍañño jana-pāmokkho

Maṅgalo puris’āsabho.

Sumano sumano dhīro

Revato rati-vaḍḍhano

Sobhito guṇa-sampanno

Anoma-dassī jan’uttamo.

Solo Introduction:
We will now recite the discourse given by the Great Hero
(The Buddha),
As a protection for virtue-loving human beings,
Against harm from all evil-doing, malevolent non-humans
Who are displeased with the Buddha’s Teachings.

The Āṭānāṭiya Protectiont
(‘The Twenty-Eight Buddhas’)
Praise be to Vipassī, possessed of vision and glory,
Praise be to Sikhī too, sympathetic to all beings,
Praise be to Vessabhu, cleansed of stains, and of ardent ways,
Praise be to Konāgamana, true Brahmin reached to perfection,
Praise be to Kassapa, in every way set free,
Praise be to Aṅgīrasa, the glorious son of the Sakyas,
He who taught this Dhamma for dispelling all dukkha.
All of them quenched of passion for the world by clearly seeing it
as it truly is,
They, of gentle speech, mighty ones of ripe wisdom.
Praise be to Gotama who is for the benefit of devas and humans,
Perfect in knowledge and conduct; mighty one of ripe wisdom,
Perfect in knowledge and conduct; we revere the Buddha
Gotama.
I pay homage to all the Buddhas who have arisen, great sages,
Taṇhaṅkara the great hero, Medhaṅkara of great renown,
Saranaṅkara the world-benefitter, Dīpaṅkara the resplendent,
Koṇḍañño, liberator of the people, Maṅgalo, a leader among
men,
Sumano, glad and wise, Revato, increaser of joy,
Sobhito, abounding in merit, Anomadassī, highest of people,

udapādi. Taṃ kho pan’idaṃ dukkha-samudayo ariyasaccaṃ pahīnan-ti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu
dhammesu, cakkhuṃ udapādi ñāṇaṃ udapādi paññā
udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi.
Idaṃ dukkha-nirodho ariya-saccan-ti me bhikkhave, pubbe
ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuṃ udapādi ñāṇaṃ
udapādi paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi. Taṃ
kho pan’idaṃ dukkha-nirodho ariya-saccaṃ
sacchikātabban-ti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu
dhammesu, cakkhuṃ udapādi ñāṇaṃ udapādi paññā
udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi. Taṃ kho pan’idaṃ
dukkha-nirodho ariya-saccaṃ sacchikatan-ti me
bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuṃ
udapādi ñāṇaṃ udapādi paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi
āloko udapādi.
Idaṃ dukkha-nirodha-gāminī-paṭipadā ariya-saccan-ti me
bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuṃ
udapādi ñāṇaṃ udapādi paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi
āloko udapādi. Taṃ kho pan’idaṃ dukkha-nirodhagāminī-paṭipadā ariya-saccaṃ bhāvetabban-ti me
bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuṃ
udapādi ñāṇaṃ udapādi paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi
āloko udapādi. Taṃ kho pan’idaṃ dukkha-nirodhagāminī-paṭipadā ariya-saccaṃ bhāvitan-ti me bhikkhave,
pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuṃ udapādi ñāṇaṃ
udapādi paññā udapādi vijjā udapādi āloko udapādi.
[Yāva-kīvañ-ca me bhikkhave] imesu catūsu ariya-saccesu,
evan-ti-parivaṭṭaṃ dvā-das’ākāraṃ yathā-bhūtaṃ

uppajjati vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā
adukkham-asukhaṃ vā, tasmiṃ pi nibbindati.
I did not declare the realisation of incomparable, perfect
enlightenment to the world with its Devas, Māras and
Brahmas, and to the mass of beings with its Gods and
Humans. But when, bhikkhus, my knowledge and vision of
reality regarding these four noble truths in three phases—
these twelve aspects—was fully clear to me, I declared the
realisation of incomparable, perfect enlightenment to the
world with its Devas, Māras and Brahmas, and to the mass
of beings with its Gods and humans. Moreover, the
knowledge and vision arose in me: “Unshakeable is my
deliverance. This is the last birth. Now there is no more
becoming for me.”
This is what the Blessed One said. The group of five
bhikkhus were glad at heart and approved of the words of
the Blessed One. Now during this discourse, the passionless, pure seeing of the truth appeared to the Venerable
Kondañña: everything that has the characteristic of arising
has the characteristic of ceasing.
When the Wheel of Dhamma had thus been set rolling by
the Blessed One, the Devas of the earth raised the cry: “In
the Deer Park at Isipatana, near Baranasi, the unsurpassed
Wheel of Dhamma has been set rolling by the Blessed One,
and no recluse, Deva, Māra, Brahma, or other being in the
world can stop it.” The Deva-kings of the four quarters,
hearing the cry of the Devas of the earth, also raised the
cry; the Devas of the Thirty-Three, hearing the cry of the
Deva-kings of the four quarters, also raised the cry;

Jivhāya pi nibbindati. Rasesu pi nibbindati.
Jivhā-viññāṇe pi nibbindati. Jivhā-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaṃ jivhā-samphassa- paccayā
uppajjati vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā
adukkham-asukhaṃ vā, tasmiṃ pi nibbindati.
Kāyasmiṃ pi nibbindat. Phoṭṭhabbesu pi nibbindati.
Kāya-viññāṇe pi nibbindati. Kāya-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaṃ kāya-samphassa-paccayā
uppajjati vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā
adukkham-asukhaṃ vā, tasmiṃ pi nibbindati.
Manasmiṃ pi nibbindati. Dhammesu pi nibbindati.
Mano-viññāṇe pi nibbindati. Mano-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaṃ mano-samphassa-paccayā
uppajjati vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā
adukkham-asukhaṃ vā, tasmiṃ pi nibbindati.
Nibbindaṃ virajjati. Virāgā vimuccati. Vimuttasmiṃ
vimuttam-iti ñāṇaṃ hoti.
‘Khīṇā jāti, vusitaṃ brahma-cariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ,
nāparaṃ itthattāyā-ti’ pajānātī-ti.”
Idam-avoca Bhagavā. Attamanā te bhikkhū Bhagavato
bhāsitaṃ abhinanduṃ. Imasmiñ-ca pana
veyyākaraṇasmiṃ bhaññamāne, tassa bhikkhusahassassa anupādāya, āsavehi cittāni vimucciṃsū-ti.
Āditta-pariyāya Sutta Niṭṭhitaṃ.

impressions received by the nose; no longer fascinated
by the tongue, by tastes, by tongue-consciousness by impressions received by the tongue, or by whatever feeling,
pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant,
that arises conditioned by impressions received by the
tongue; no longer fascinated by the mind, by the things of
the mind, by mind-consciousness, by impressions received
by the mind, or by whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant,
or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, that arises conditioned by impressions received by the mind.
With the ending of fascination there is dispassion; having
abandoned passion, there is liberation; and with liberation
there is the realisation of freedom. The understanding
arises: “Birth is exhausted, and the Holy Life has been lived
out; what is to be done is done, there is no more of this to
come.”
This is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were glad
and approved of his words. Now, during this discourse the
hearts of those thousand bhikkhus were liberated from
taints through clinging no more.
Here ends The Fire Sermon

ñāṇa-dassanaṃ na suvisuddhaṃ ahosi, n’eva tāvāhaṃ
bhikkhave sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake,
sassamaṇa-brāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadeva-manussāya,
anuttaraṃ sammā-sambodhiṃ abhi-sambuddho
paccaññāsiṃ. Yato ca kho me bhikkhave imesu catūsu
ariya-saccesu, evan-ti-parivaṭṭaṃ dvā-das’ākāraṃ
yathābhūtaṃ ñāṇa-dassanaṃ suvisuddhaṃ ahosi,
athāhaṃ bhikkhave sadevake loke samārake sabrahmake,
sassamaṇa-brāhmaṇiyā pajāya sadeva-manussāya,
anuttaraṃ sammā- sambodhiṃ abhisambuddho
paccaññāsiṃ, ñāṇañ-ca pana me dassanaṃ udapādi:
akuppā me vimutti, ayam-antimā jāti, n’atthi dāni
punabbhavo-ti.” Idam-avoca Bhagavā. Attamanā pañcavaggiyā bhikkhū Bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanduṃ.
Imasmiñ-ca pana veyyākaraṇasmiṃ bhaññamāne,
Āyasmato Koṇḍaññassa virajaṃ vīta-malaṃ dhammacakkhuṃ udapādi. Yaṅ-kiñci samudaya- dhammaṃ
sabban-taṃ nirodha-dhamman-ti.
[Pavattite ca Bhagavatā] dhamma-cakke, bhummā devā
saddam-anussāvesuṃ: “Etam-Bhagavatā Bārāṇasiyaṃ
Isipatane Migadāye anuttaraṃ dhamma-cakkaṃ
pavattitaṃ, appaṭivattiyaṃ samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā
devena vā mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasminti.” Bhummānaṃ devānaṃ saddaṃ sutvā, Cātummahārājikā devā saddam-anussāvesuṃ. Cātummahā-rājikānaṃ
devānaṃ saddaṃ sutvā, Tāvatiṃsā devā saddamanussāvesuṃ. Tāvatiṃsānaṃ devānaṃ saddaṃ sutvā,
Yāmā devā saddam-anussāvesuṃ. Yāmānaṃ devānaṃ

the Yāma Devas, hearing the cry of the Devas of the
Thirty-Three, also raised the cry; the Devas of Delight,
hearing the cry of the Yāma Devas, also raised the cry; the
Devas of Creativity, hearing the cry of the Devas of Delight,
also raised the cry; the Devas Who Delight in the Work of
Other Devas, hearing the cry of the Devas of Creativity, also
raised the cry; the Devas attendant on the Brahma Gods,
hearing the cry of the Devas Who Delight in the Work of
Other Devas, also raised the cry: “In the Deer Park at
Isipatana, near Baranasi, the unsurpassed Wheel of
Dhamma has been set rolling by the Blessed One, and
no recluse, Deva, Mara, Brahma, or other being in the
world can stop it.”
Thus in a moment, in a flash, at that very hour, word of the
turning of the Wheel of Dhamma soared up to the realm of
the Brahma Gods and this ten-thousandfold world system
shook and rocked and quaked; and a boundless, sublime
radiance surpassing the glory of the Devas appeared on
earth. Then the Blessed One made the utterance: ‘Truly,
Kondañña has understood, Kondañña has understood.”
Thus it was that Venerable Kondañña got the name,
‘Kondañña-who-understands.’
Here ends the Discourse on
Setting in Motion the Wheel of the Dhamma

Kena ādittaṃ? Ādittaṃ rāg’agginā dos’agginā
moh’agginā, ādittaṃ jātiyā jarā-maraṇena, sokehi
paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi ādittan-ti
vadāmi.
Mano āditto. Dhammā ādittā. Mano-viññāṇaṃ ādittaṃ.
Mano-samphasso āditto. Yam-p’idaṃ manosamphassa-paccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ vā
dukkhaṃ vā adukkham-asukhaṃ vā, tam-pi ādittaṃ.
Kena ādittaṃ? Ādittaṃ rāg’agginā dos’agginā
moh’agginā, ādittaṃ jātiyā jarā-maraṇena, sokehi
paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi ādittan-ti
vadāmi.
[Evaṃ passaṃ bhikkhave] sutavā ariya-sāvako,
cakkhusmiṃ pi nibbindati. Rūpesu pi nibbindati.
Cakkhu-viññāṇe pi nibbindati. Cakkhu-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaṃ cakkhu-samphassa-paccayā
uppajjati vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā
adukkham-asukhaṃ vā, tasmiṃ pi nibbindati.
Sotasmiṃ pi nibbindati. Saddesu pi nibbindati.
Sota-viññāṇe pi nibbindati. Sota-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaṃ sota-samphassa-paccayā
uppajjati vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā
adukkham-asukhaṃ vā, tasmiṃ pi nibbindati.
Ghānasmiṃ pi nibbindati. Gandhesu pi nibbindati.
Ghāna-viññāṇe pi nibbindati. Ghāna-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaṃ ghāna-samphassa-paccayā

Burning with what? Burning with the fire of greed, with
the fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion; it is burning
with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief and despair, I declare.
The mind is burning, the things of the mind are burning,
mind-consciousness is burning, impressions received by
the mind are burning, and whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, conditioned
by impressions received by the mind, that too is burning.
Burning with what? Burning with the fire of greed, with
the fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion; it is burning
with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief and despair, I declare.
Bhikkhus, a Noble Disciple who has listened well, sees this,
and is no longer fascinated by the eye, by forms, by eyeconsciousness, by impressions received by the eye, or by
whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, that arises conditioned by impressions
received by the eye; no longer fascinated by the ear, by
sounds, by ear-consciousness, by impressions received by
the ear, or by whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or
neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, that arises conditioned
by impressions received by the ear; no longer fascinated by
the nose, by odours, by olfactory- consciousness, by impressions received by the nose, or by whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neither- pleasant-nor-unpleasant, that
arises conditioned by

saddaṃ sutvā, Tusitā devā saddam-anussāvesuṃ.
Tusitānaṃ devānaṃ saddaṃ sutvā, Nimmāna-ratī devā
saddam-anussāvesuṃ. Nimmāna-ratīnaṃ devānaṃ
saddaṃ sutvā, Para-nimmita-vasa-vattī devā
saddam-anussāvesuṃ. Para-nimmita-vasa-vattīnaṃ
devānaṃ saddaṃ sutvā, Brahma-kāyikā devā saddamanussāvesuṃ: “Etam-Bhagavatā Bārāṇasiyaṃ Isipatane
Migadāye anuttaraṃ dhamma-cakkaṃ pavattitaṃ,
appaṭivattiyaṃ samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā
mārena vā brahmunā vā kenaci vā lokasmin-ti.”
Iti-ha tena khaṇena tena muhuttena, yāva brahma-lokā
saddo abbhuggacchi. Ayañ-ca dasa-sahassī loka-dhātu,
saṅkampi sampakampi sampavedhi. Appamāṇo ca oḷāro
obhāso loke pātur-ahosi, atikkamm’eva devānaṃ
dev’ānubhāvaṃ.
Atha kho Bhagavā udānaṃ udānesi: “Aññāsi vata bho
Koṇḍañño, aññāsi vata bho Koṇḍañño-ti.” Iti-h’idaṃ
āyasmato Koṇḍaññassa, Aññā-koṇḍañño’tv-eva nāmaṃ,
ahosī-ti.
Dhamma-cakkappavattana Suttaṃ Niṭṭhitaṃ.

Anatta-lakkhaṇa Sutta
Solo Introduction:
All beings should take pains to understand the characteristic of anattā—non-self—which provides matchless deliverance from self-belief and self-perception
as taught by the supreme Buddha. This teaching is for
the perfect comprehension of meditators of perceived
truths, for the development of perfect knowledge of
these perceived phenomena, and for the investigation
with understanding of all defiled mind-moments. The
consequence of this is total deliverance, and desirous
of bringing this teaching out with its great benefit, let
us now recite this sutta.

The Discourse on the Characteristic
of Non-self
Thus have I heard: Once the Blessed One was staying in
the Deer Park at Isipatana, near Baranasi. There the
Blessed One addressed the group of five bhikkhus:
Bhikkhus, form is not self. If form were self, then this form
would not tend to affliction, and one could say of form:
“Let my form be thus, let my form be not thus.” Indeed,
bhikkhus, it is since form is not self that it leads to affliction, and none can have it of form: “Let my form be thus,
let my form be not thus.”
Bhikkhus, feelings are not self. If feelings were self, then
feelings would not tend to affliction, and one could say of
feelings:

Yam-p’idaṃ sota-samphassa-paccayā uppajjati
vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkham-asukhaṃ
vā, tam-pi ādittaṃ.
Kena ādittaṃ? Ādittaṃ rāg’agginā dos’agginā
moh’agginā, ādittaṃ jātiyā jarā-maraṇena, sokehi
paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi ādittan-ti
vadāmi.
Ghānaṃ ādittaṃ. Gandhā ādittā. Ghāna- viññāṇaṃ
ādittaṃ. Ghāna-samphasso āditto. Yam-p’idaṃ
ghāna-samphassa-paccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ
vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkham-asukhaṃ vā, tam-pi ādittaṃ.
Kena ādittaṃ? Ādittaṃ rāg’agginā dos’agginā
moh’agginā, ādittaṃ jātiyā jarā-maraṇena, sokehi
paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi ādittan-ti
vadāmi.
Jivhā ādittā. Rasā ādittā. Jivhā-viññāṇaṃ ādittaṃ.
Jivhā-samphasso āditto. Yam-p’idaṃ
jivhā-samphassa-paccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ
vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkham-asukhaṃ vā, tam-pi ādittaṃ.
Kena ādittaṃ? Ādittaṃ rāg’agginā dos’agginā
moh’agginā, ādittaṃ jātiyā jarā-maraṇena, sokehi
paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi ādittan-ti
vadāmi.
Kāyo āditto. Phoṭṭhabbā ādittā. Kāya- viññāṇaṃ
ādittaṃ. Kāya-samphasso āditto. Yam-p’idaṃ
kāya-samphassa-paccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ
vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkham-asukhaṃ vā, tam-pi ādittaṃ.

Anatta-lakkhaṇa Sutta
Solo Introduction:
and whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neitherpleasant-nor-unpleasant, conditioned by impressions received
by the ear, that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning
with the fire of greed, with the fire of aversion, with the fire
of delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief
and despair, I declare.
The nose is burning, odours are burning, olfactory-consciousness is burning, impressions received by the nose are
burning, and whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, conditioned by impressions
received by the nose, that too is burning. Burning with
what? Burning with the fire of greed, with the fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief and despair, I declare.
The tongue is burning, tastes are burning, taste-consciousness is burning, impressions received by the tongue are
burning, and whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, conditioned by impressions
received by the tongue, that too is burning. Burning with
what? Burning with the fire of greed, with the fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief and despair, I declare.
The body is burning, tactile objects are burning, body-consciousness is burning, impressions received by the body are
burning, and whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, conditioned by impressions
received by the body, that too is burning.

Yantaṃ sattehi dukkhena

Ñeyyaṃ anattalakkhaṇaṃ

Attavādāttasaññāṇaṃ

Sammadeva vimocanaṃ

Sambuddho taṃ pakāsesi

Diṭṭhasaccāna yoginaṃ

Uttariṃ paṭivedhāya

Bhāvetuṃ ñāṇamuttamaṃ

Yantesaṃ diṭṭhadhammānaṃ Ñāṇenupaparikkhataṃ
Sabbāsavehi cittāni

Vimucciṃsu asesato

Tathā ñāṇānusārena

Sāsanaṃ kātumicchataṃ

Sādhūnaṃ atthasiddhatthaṃ Taṃ suttantaṃ bhaṇāma se.

Anatta-lakkhaṇa Sutta
[Evam-me sutaṃ.] Ekaṃ samayaṃ Bhagavā, Bārāṇasiyaṃ
viharati Isipatane Migadāye. Tatra kho Bhagavā pañcavaggiye bhikkhū āmantesi:
“Rūpaṃ bhikkhave anattā. Rūpañ-ca h’idaṃ bhikkhave
attā abhavissa, na-y-idaṃ rūpaṃ ābādhāya saṃvatteyya,
labbhetha ca rūpe: evaṃ me rūpaṃ hotu evaṃ me rūpaṃ
mā ahosī-ti. Yasmā ca kho bhikkhave rūpaṃ anattā, tasmā
rūpaṃ ābādhāya saṃvattati. Na ca labbhati rūpe: evaṃ
me rūpaṃ hotu evaṃ me rūpaṃ mā ahosī-ti.
Vedanā anattā. Vedanā ca h’idaṃ bhikkhave attā
abhavissa, na-y-idaṃ vedanā ābādhāya saṃvatteyya,
labbhetha ca vedanāya: evaṃ me vedanā hotu evaṃ me
vedanā mā ahosī-ti. Yasmā ca kho bhikkhave vedanā
anattā, tasmā vedanā ābādhāya saṃvattati. Na ca labbhati

Solo Introduction:
“Let my feelings be thus, let my feelings be not thus.”
Indeed, bhikkhus, it is since feelings are not self that they
lead to affliction, and none can have it of feelings: “Let my
feelings be thus, let my feelings be not thus.”
Bhikkhus, perception is not self. If perception were self,
then perception would not tend to affliction, and one could
say of perception: “Let perception be thus, let perception
be not thus.” Indeed, bhikkhus, it is since perception is not
self that it leads to affliction, and none can have it of
perception: “Let perception be thus, let it not be thus.”
Bhikkhus, mental formations are not self. If mental formations were self, then mental formations would not tend to
affliction, and one could say of mental formations: “Let my
mental formations be thus, let my mental formations be
not thus.” Indeed, bhikkhus, it is since mental formations
are not self that they lead to affliction, and none can have it
of mental formations: “Let my mental formations be thus,
let my mental formations be not thus.”
Bhikkhus, consciousness is not self. If consciousness were
self, then consciousness would not tend to affliction, and
one could say of consciousness: “Let my consciousness be
thus, let my consciousness not be thus.” Indeed, bhikkhus,
it is since consciousness is not self that it leads to affliction,
and none can have it of consciousness: “Let my consciousness be thus, let my consciousness not be thus.”
What do you think, bhikkhus, is form permanent or impermanent? “Impermanent, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, is it satisfactory or unsatisfactory? “Unsatisfactory, Venerable Sir.”

Veneyyadamanopāye

Sabbaso pāramiṃ gato

Amoghavacano Buddho

Abhiññāyānusāsako

Ciṇṇānurūpato cāpi

Dhammena vinayaṃ pajaṃ

Ciṇṇāggipāricariyānaṃ

Sambojjhārahayoginaṃ

Yamādittapariyāyaṃ

Desayanto manoharaṃ

Te sotāro vimocesi

Asekkhāya vimuttiyā

Tathevopaparikkhāya

Viññūṇaṃ sotumicchataṃ

Dukkhatālakkhaṇopāyaṃ

Taṃ suttantaṃ bhaṇāma se.

Āditta-pariyāya Sutta
[Evam-me sutaṃ.] Ekaṃ samayaṃ Bhagavā, Gayāyaṃ
viharati gayāsīse, saddhiṃ bhikkhu-sahassena. Tatra kho
Bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi:
“Sabbaṃ bhikkhave ādittaṃ. Kiñ-ca bhikkhave sabbaṃ
ādittaṃ? Cakkhuṃ bhikkhave ādittaṃ. Rūpā ādittā.
Cakkhu-viññāṇaṃ ādittaṃ. Cakkhu-samphasso āditto.
Yam-p’idaṃ cakkhu-samphassa-paccayā uppajjati
vedayitaṃ, sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkham-asukhaṃ
vā, tam-pi ādittaṃ.
Kena ādittaṃ? Ādittaṃ rāg’agginā dos’agginā moh’agginā,
ādittaṃ jātiyā jarā-maraṇena, sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi
domanassehi upāyāsehi ādittan-ti vadāmi.
Sotaṃ ādittaṃ. Saddā ādittā. Sota-viññāṇaṃ ādittaṃ.
Sota-samphasso āditto.

Āditta-pariyāya Sutta
Solo Introduction:
With his skill in training the trainable, the
All-transcendent Buddha, clear speaker, teacher of
highest knowledge, he who expounds the Dhamma
and Vinaya (training) that is fitting and worthy to
the people, teaching this delightful fire-parable to
meditators of highest skill has liberated those who
listen with the liberation that needs no further
training, through the true investigation of the wise
and attentive. Let us recite this Sutta displaying the
characteristics of dukkha.

The Fire Sermon
Thus have I heard: Once the Blessed One was staying near
Gaya, on Gaya Head, together with a thousand bhikkhus.
There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus:
Bhikkhus, all things are burning. And what, bhikkhus, are
all the things that are burning? The eye is burning, forms
are burning, eye-consciousness is burning, impressions
received by the eye are burning, and whatever feeling,
pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant,
conditioned by impressions received by the eye, that too is
burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire of
greed, with the fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion; it
is burning with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief and despair, I
declare.
The ear is burning, sounds are burning, ear-consciousness
is burning, impressions received by the ear are burning,

vedanāya: evaṃ me vedanā hotu evaṃ me vedanā mā
ahosī-ti.
Saññā anattā. Saññā ca h’idaṃ bhikkhave attā
abhavissa, na-y-idaṃ saññā ābādhāya saṃvatteyya,
labbhetha ca saññāya, evaṃ me saññā hotu evaṃ me
saññā mā ahosī-ti. Yasmā ca kho bhikkhave saññā
anattā, tasmā saññā ābādhāya saṃvattati. Na ca
labbhati saññāya, evaṃ me saññā hotu evaṃ me saññā
mā ahosī-ti.
Saṅkhārā anattā. Saṅkhārā ca h’idaṃ bhikkhave attā
abhavissaṃsu, na-y-idaṃ saṅkhārā ābādhāya
saṃvatteyyuṃ, labbhetha ca saṅkhāresu: evaṃ me
saṅkhārā hontu evaṃ me saṅkhārā mā ahesun-ti. Yasmā
ca kho bhikkhave saṅkhārā anattā, tasmā saṅkhārā
ābādhāya saṃvattanti. Na ca labbhati saṅkhāresu: evaṃ
me saṅkhārā hontu evaṃ me saṅkhārā mā ahesun-ti.
Viññāṇaṃ anattā. Viññāṇañ-ca h’idaṃ bhikkhave attā
abhavissa, na-y-idaṃ viññāṇaṃ ābādhāya saṃvatteyya,
labbhetha ca viññāṇe: evaṃ me viññāṇaṃ hotu evaṃ
me viññāṇaṃ mā ahosī-ti. Yasmā ca kho bhikkhave
viññāṇaṃ anattā, tasmā viññāṇaṃ ābādhāya
saṃvattati. Na ca labbhati viññāṇe: evaṃ me viññāṇaṃ
hotu evaṃ me viññāṇaṃ mā ahosī-ti.
[Taṃ kiṃ maññatha bhikkhave,] rūpaṃ niccaṃ vā
aniccaṃ vā-ti?”
“Aniccaṃ bhante.”
“Yam-panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā-ti?”
“Dukkhaṃ bhante.”

That which is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to
change, can it rightly be regarded thus: “This is mine, this
am I, this is my (true) self?” “No, Venerable Sir.”
What do you think, bhikkhus, is feeling permanent or
impermanent? “Impermanent, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, is it satisfactory or unsatisfactory? “Unsatisfactory, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to
change, can it rightly be regarded thus: “This is mine, this
am I, this is my (true) self?” “No, Venerable Sir.”
What do you think, bhikkhus, is perception permanent or
impermanent? “Impermanent, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, is it satisfactory or unsatisfactory? “Unsatisfactory, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to
change, can it rightly be regarded thus: “This is mine, this
am I, this is my (true) self?” “No, Venerable Sir.”
What do you think, bhikkhus, are mental formations permanent or impermanent? “Impermanent, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, is it satisfactory or unsatisfactory? “Unsatisfactory, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to
change, can it rightly be regarded thus: “This is mine, this
am I, this is my (true) self?” “No, Venerable Sir.”

Ye keci saṅkhārā atītānāgata-paccuppannā, ajjhattā vā
bahiddhā vā, oḷārikā vā sukhumā vā, hīnā vā paṇītā vā,
ye dūre santike vā, sabbe saṅkhārā, n’etaṃ mama
n’eso’ham-asmi na m’eso attā-ti. Evam-etaṃ
yathā-bhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ.
Yaṅ-kiñci viññāṇaṃ atītānāgata-paccuppannaṃ,
ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā, oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā,
hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā, yan-dūre santike vā, sabbaṃ
viññāṇaṃ, n’etaṃ mama n’eso’ham-asmi na m’eso
attā-ti. Evam-etaṃ yathā-bhūtaṃ sammappaññāya
daṭṭhabbaṃ.
Evaṃ passaṃ bhikkhave sutavā ariya-sāvako, rūpasmiṃ
pi nibbindati. Vedanāya pi nibbindati. Saññāya pi
nibbindati. Saṅkhāresu pi nibbindati. Viññāṇasmiṃ pi
nibbindati. Nibbindaṃ virajjati. Virāgā vimuccati.
Vimuttasmiṃ vimuttam-iti ñāṇaṃ hoti. ‘Khīṇā jāti,
vusitaṃ brahma-cariyaṃ, kataṃ karaṇīyaṃ, nāparaṃ
itthattāyā-ti’ pajānātī-ti.”
Idam-avoca Bhagavā. Attamanā pañca-vaggiyā bhikkhū
Bhagavato bhāsitaṃ abhinanduṃ. Imasmiñ-ca pana
veyyākaraṇasmiṃ bhaññamāne, pañca-vaggiyānaṃ
bhikkhūnaṃ anupādāya, āsavehi cittāni vimucciṃsū-ti.
Anatta-lakkhaṇa Suttaṃ Niṭṭhitaṃ.

Similarly, whatever are mental formations, past, future or
presently arisen, whether in oneself or external, whether
coarse or subtle, whether inferior or superior, whether far
or near, should be seen with right understanding thus:
“This is not mine, this am I not, this is not my self.”
Similarly, whatever is consciousness, past, future or
presently arisen, whether in oneself or external, whether
coarse or subtle, whether inferior or superior, whether far
or near, should be seen with right understanding thus:
“This is not mine, this am I not, this is not my self.”
Bhikkhus, a wise Noble Disciple who has listened well, sees
this, and is no longer fascinated by form, no longer fascinated by feeling, no longer fascinated by perception, no
longer fascinated by mental formations, no longer fascinated by consciousness. Becoming dispassionate, his passion fades away; with the fading of passion his heart is
liberated; when liberated there comes the knowledge: it is
liberated. He understands: birth is exhausted, the Holy Life
has been lived out, what was to be done is done, there is no
more of this to come.
This is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus of the
group of five were glad, and they delighted in his words.
Now, while this discourse was being delivered the hearts of
those five bhikkhus were liberated from taints through
clinging no more.
Here ends the Discourse
on the Characteristic of Non-self

“Yam-panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāma-dhammaṃ,
kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: Etaṃ mama
eso’ham-asmi eso me attā-ti?”
“No h’etaṃ bhante.”
Taṃ kiṃ maññatha bhikkhave, vedanā niccā vā aniccā
vā-ti?”
“Aniccā bhante.”
“Yam-panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā-ti?”
“Dukkhaṃ bhante.”
“Yam-panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāma-dhammaṃ,
kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: Etaṃ mama
eso’ham-asmi eso me attā-ti?”
“No h’etaṃ bhante.”
“Taṃ kiṃ maññatha bhikkhave, saññā niccā vā aniccā
vā-ti?”
“Aniccā bhante.”
“Yam-panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā-ti?”
“Dukkhaṃ bhante.”
“Yam-panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāma- dhammaṃ,
kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: Etaṃ mama
eso’ham-asmi eso me attā-ti?”
“No h’etaṃ bhante.”
“Taṃ kiṃ maññatha bhikkhave, saṅkhārā niccā vā
aniccā vā-ti?”
“Aniccā bhante.”
“Yam-panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā-ti?”
“Dukkhaṃ bhante.”
“Yam-panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāma-dhammaṃ,
kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ:

What do you think, bhikkhus, is consciousness permanent
or impermanent? “Impermanent, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, is it satisfactory or unsatisfactory? “Unsatisfactory, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to
change, can it rightly be regarded thus: “This is mine, this
am I, this is my (true) self?” “No, Venerable Sir.”
Therefore, bhikkhus, whatever is form, past, future or presently arisen, whether in oneself or external, whether coarse
or subtle, whether inferior or superior, whether far or near,
should be seen with right understanding thus: “This is not
mine, this am I not, this is not my self.”
Similarly, whatever are feelings, past, future or presently
arisen, whether in oneself or external, whether coarse or
subtle, whether inferior or superior, whether far or near,
should be seen with right understanding thus: “This is not
mine, this am I not, this is not my self.”
Similarly, whatever is perception, past, future or presently
arisen, whether in oneself or external, whether coarse or
subtle, whether inferior or superior, whether far or near,
should be seen with right understanding thus: “This is not
mine, this am I not, this is not my self.”

Etaṃ mama eso’ham-asmi eso me attā-ti?”
“No h’etaṃ bhante.”
“Taṃ kiṃ maññatha bhikkhave, viññāṇaṃ niccaṃ vā
aniccaṃ vā-ti?”
“Aniccaṃ” bhante.”
“Yam-panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vā taṃ sukhaṃ vā’ti?”
“Dukkhaṃ bhante.”
“Yam-panāniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāma-dhammaṃ,
kallaṃ nu taṃ samanupassituṃ: Etaṃ mama
eso’ham-asmi eso me attā-ti?”
“No h’etaṃ bhante.”
[“Tasmā-t-iha bhikkhave,] yaṅ-kiñci rūpaṃ
atītānāgata-paccuppannaṃ, ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā,
oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā, hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā,
yan-dūre santike vā, sabbaṃ rūpaṃ, n’etaṃ mama
n’eso’ham-asmi na m’eso attā-ti. Evam-etaṃ
yathā-bhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ.
Yā kāci vedanā atītānāgata-paccuppannā, ajjhattā vā
bahiddhā vā, oḷārikā vā sukhumā vā, hīnā vā paṇītā vā,
yā dūre santike vā, sabbā vedanā, n’etaṃ mama
n’eso’ham-asmi na m’eso attā-ti. Evam-etaṃ
yathā-bhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ.
Yā kāci saññā atītānāgata-paccuppannā, ajjhattā vā
bahiddhā vā, oḷārikā vā sukhumā vā, hīnā vā paṇītā vā,
yā dūre santike vā, sabbā saññā, n’etaṃ mama
n’eso’ham-asmi na m’eso attā-ti. Evam-etaṃ
yathā-bhūtaṃ sammappaññāya daṭṭhabbaṃ.

