DEDICATION OF OFFERINGS
(Yo so) bh÷agavæ ÷arahaµ sammæsambuddho
Svækkh×æto yena bh÷agav×atæ dhammo
Supa¥÷ipanno yassa bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
Tamm×ayaµ bh÷agavantaµ s÷adhammaµ s÷asa³ghaµ
Imeh×i sakkæreh÷i yathærahaµ ærop÷itehi ÷abh×ipþj÷ayæma
Sædh×u no bhante bh÷agavæ s÷ucira-parinibb÷utopi
Pacch×imæ-j÷an×atæn×ukamp÷a-mænasæ
Ime sakkære dugg÷at÷a-pa¼¼ækær×a-bhþte p÷a¥igga¼hætu
Amh×ækaµ døgh÷arattaµ h÷itæya s÷ukhæya
Arahaµ sammæsambuddho bh÷agavæ
Buddhaµ bh÷agavantaµ ÷æbh×ivædemi
(Bow.)
(Svækkh×æto) bh÷agav×atæ dhammo
Dhammaµ namassæmi

(Bow.)

(Supa¥÷ipanno) bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
S×a³ghaµ n÷amæmi
(Bow.)

PRELIMINARY HOMAGE
(H×anda mayaµ buddhass÷a bhagavato pubbabhæga-namak÷æraµ karomase)
[Namo tassa] bh÷agavato arah÷ato s×ammæs×ambuddh÷assa
(Three times.)

RECOLLECTION OF THE BUDDHA
(H×anda mayaµ buddhæn÷uss÷at÷inayaµ karomase)
[Taµ kh×o] pana bh÷agavantaµ evaµ kal×yæ¼o kitt÷isaddo abbhugg÷ato
Itipi so bh÷agavæ ÷arahaµ sammæsambuddho
Vijjæc÷ara¼×a-sampanno s÷ug÷ato lok÷av×idþ
An×utt÷aro puris÷adamma-særathi satthæ deva-m÷anussænaµ buddho bh÷agavæ ti

DEDICATION OF OFFERINGS
(To the Bl÷essed One,) th÷e Lord, who f×ully ÷attained perfect enl÷ightenment,
To th÷e Teaching, which he exp÷ound÷ed so well,
And to th÷e Blessed One’s disc×iples who have pr÷acticed well,
To these—th÷e Buddha, th÷e Dhamma, ÷and the S×angha—
We render w÷ith offerings our r×ightful h¯omage.
It is w×ell for us that the Bl÷essed One, having attained l÷iber×ation,
Still had c÷ompassion for later g×ener¯ations.
May th÷ese simple ×offerings be acc÷epted
For ÷our long-lasting benefit and f÷or the h×appiness it gi¯ves us.
Th÷e Lord, th÷e Perfectly Enl×ightened and Bl÷essed One—
÷I render homage t÷o the B×uddha, the Bl÷essed One.
(Bow.)
(Th÷e Teaching,) so c÷ompletely expl×ained by him—
I b¯ow t÷o th÷e Dh÷amma.
(Bow.)
(Th÷e Blessed One’s disc×iples,) who have pr÷acticed well—
I b¯ow t÷o th÷e S÷angha.
(Bow.)

PRELIMINARY HOMAGE
(N×ow let us pay preliminary homage to the B÷uddha.)
[H×om×age to th÷e Bl÷essed], N×oble, ÷and P÷erfectly Enlightened One. (Three times.)

RECOLLECTION OF THE BUDDHA
(N×ow let us chant the recollection of the B÷uddha.)
[÷A good word] of th÷e Blessed One’s r÷eput×ation has spread as f÷ollows:
He, th÷e Bl÷essed One, is indeed the P×ure One, th÷e Perfectly Enl×ightened One;
He is i÷ mpeccable ÷in conduct and ÷underst×anding, the ÷Acc×omplished One,
th÷e Knower ×of th÷e Worlds;
He trains perfectly th÷ose who w×ish t×o b÷e trained; he is Teacher of g×ods and
h÷umans; he is Awake and H÷oly.

SUPREME PRAISE OF THE BUDDHA
(H×anda mayaµ buddhæbh÷ig÷øtiµ karomase)
[Buddhavær÷ah×anta] varatæd÷ig×u¼æbh÷iyutto
Suddhæbh÷iñæ¼a-k÷ar×u¼æhi s×amæg÷atatto
Bodhes÷i yo s÷uj÷an×ataµ k÷am×alaµ v÷a sþro
Vandæmah×aµ t÷amar÷a¼aµ s÷iras×æ j÷inendaµ
Buddho yo sabb÷apæ¼ønaµ s÷ara¼aµ khem÷amutt÷amaµ
P÷a¥hamænuss÷ati¥¥hænaµ vandæm÷i taµ s×iren÷ahaµ
Buddhass×æh÷asmi dæso1 va buddho me s÷æmik×issaro
Buddho dukkhass÷a ghætæ c÷a vidhætæ c÷a h×itass÷a me
Buddhassæh×aµ niyyædemi s÷arørañjøv÷itañc÷idaµ
Vandantoh×aµ2 c÷arissæmi buddhassev÷a s×ubodh÷itaµ
Natthi me s÷ar×a¼aµ aññaµ buddho me s÷ar×a¼aµ v÷araµ
Etena sacc÷avajjena vaððheyyaµ s÷atthu-s×æsane
Buddhaµ me vand÷amænena3 yaµ puññaµ p÷as×utaµ ÷idha
S÷abbepi ant÷aræyæ me mæh×es×uµ t÷ass×a tej÷asæ
(Bowing:)
Kæyena væcæya va cet÷as×æ væ
B×uddhe k÷ukammaµ p÷akataµ m÷ayæ yaµ
B×uddho p÷a¥igga¼h÷ætu acc÷ayantaµ
Kælantare s×aµvarituµ v÷a b×uddhe

RECOLLECTION OF THE DHAMMA
(H×anda mayaµ dhammæn÷uss÷at÷inayaµ karomase)
[Svækkh×æto] bh÷agav×atæ dhammo
S×andi¥¥h÷iko ÷akæl÷iko eh÷ipass÷iko
Opanay÷iko p÷acc÷attaµ ved×it÷abbo viññþhø ti

SUPREME PRAISE OF THE DHAMMA
(H×anda mayaµ dhammæbh÷ig÷øtiµ karomase)
[Svækkh×æt÷atæ] d÷igu¼a-yog÷a-v×asen÷a seyyo
Yo magg÷apæka-p÷ar‰iyatt÷i-v×imokkh÷a-bhedo
Dhammo k÷ulok÷a-p÷at×anæ t÷ad×a-dhær÷i-dhærø
Vandæmah×aµ t÷amah÷araµ v÷aradh×amm÷ametaµ
Dhammo yo sabb÷apæ¼ønaµ s÷ara¼aµ khem÷amutt÷amaµ
D÷utiyænuss÷ati¥¥hænaµ vandæm÷i taµ s×iren÷ahaµ
1

Women chant dæsø.
Women chant vandantøh×aµ.
3
Women chant vand÷amænæya.

2

SUPREME PRAISE OF THE BUDDHA
(N×ow let us chant the supreme praise of the Bu÷ddha.)
[Th÷e Buddha,] th÷e truly w×orthy one, ÷endowed with such ×excellent qu÷alities,
Whose being is composed of p÷urity, transcendental w×isdom, and comp÷assion,
Who has ÷enlightened the w°ise like th÷e sun aw×akening the l÷otus—
I bow ÷my head to th÷at peaceful ch×ief of c÷onquerors.
Th÷e Buddha, who is th÷e safe, s÷ecure r×efuge of a¯ll beings—
As th÷e First Object of R÷ecoll×ection, ÷I venerate him with b×owed head.
I am indeed the Buddha’s s÷ervant, th÷e Buddha is my L×ord ÷and Guide.
Th÷e Buddha is sorrow’s destr÷oyer, who bestows bl×ess×ings ÷on me.
To th÷e Buddha I d×edicate this b÷o÷dy and life,
And in d÷evotion I w÷ill w°alk the Buddha’s p×ath of ÷aw÷akening.
For me there is no other r÷efuge, th÷e Buddha is my ×excell÷ent r÷efuge.
By th÷e utterance of th÷is tr°u°th, may I grow in the M×ast÷er’s Way.
By my d÷evotion to the B÷uddha, and th÷e blessing of this pr×actice—
By i÷ ts power, may ÷all obstacles be ×ov÷ercome.
(Bowing:)
By body, speech, ÷or mind,
For whatever wr÷ong action I have c÷ommitted towards the B÷uddha,
May my ÷acknowledgement of fault be acc×epted,
That i÷ n the future there may be r÷estraint regarding the B÷uddha.

RECOLLECTION OF THE DHAMMA
(N×ow let us chant the recollection of the Dh÷amma.)
[Th÷e Dhamma] is w÷ell exp×ounded by the Bl÷essed One,
Apparent here ÷and now, timeless, ÷encouraging inv÷estig×ation,
Leading ÷inwards, to be ÷experienced ind÷ividually b×y th÷e wise.

SUPREME PRAISE OF THE DHAMMA
(N×ow let us chant the supreme praise of the Dh÷amma.)
[It ™is excellent] b÷ecause it is “w÷ell exp×ounded,”
And it can be d÷ivided int÷o Path and Fruit, Practice and L™iber×ation.
Th÷e Dhamma holds those who ÷uphold it from f÷alling int÷o del×usion.
I revere th÷e excellent t×eaching, that which removes d÷arkness—
Th÷e Dhamma, which is the s÷upreme, s÷ecure r×efuge of a¯ll beings—
As th÷e Second Object of R÷ecoll×ection, ÷I venerate it with b×owed head.

Dhammass×æh÷asmi dæso1 va dhammo me s÷æmik×issaro
Dhammo dukkhass÷a ghætæ c÷a vidhætæ c÷a h×itass÷a me
Dhammassæh×aµ niyyædemi s÷arørañjøv÷itañc÷idaµ
Vandantoh×aµ2 c÷arissæmi dhammassev÷a s×udhamm÷ataµ
Natthi me s÷ar×a¼aµ aññaµ dhammo me s÷ar×a¼aµ v÷araµ
Etena sacc÷avajjena vaððheyyaµ s÷atthu-s×æsane
Dhammaµ me vand÷amænena3 yaµ puññaµ p÷as×utaµ i÷ dha
S÷abbepi ant÷aræyæ me mæh×es×uµ t÷ass×a tej÷asæ
(Bowing:)
Kæyena væcæya va cet÷as×æ væ
Dh×amme k÷ukammaµ p÷akataµ m÷ayæ yaµ
Dh×ammo p÷a¥igga¼h÷ætu acc÷ayantaµ
Kælantare s×aµvarituµ v÷a dh×amme

RECOLLECTION OF THE SANGHA
(H×anda mayaµ sa³ghæn÷uss÷at÷inayaµ karomase)
[Supa¥÷ipanno] bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
Ujupa¥÷ipanno bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
Ñæyapa¥÷ipanno bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
S×æmøc÷ip÷a¥÷ipanno bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
Yadidaµ cattæri puris÷ayugæni a¥¥h×a puris÷apugg÷alæ
Esa bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
Æh÷u¼eyyo pæh÷u¼eyyo dakkh÷i¼eyyo añj÷ali-k÷ar×a¼øyo
An×utt÷araµ puññakkh÷ettaµ lokassæ ti

SUPREME PRAISE OF THE SANGHA
(H×anda mayaµ sa³ghæbh÷ig÷øtiµ karomase)
[S÷addhammajo] supa¥ipatt÷ig×u¼æbh÷iyutto
Yo¥¥habb÷idho ar×iyapugg÷al×a-sa³gh÷ase¥¥ho
S×ølæd÷idhamma-p÷avaræs÷ay×a-kæy÷a-citto
Vandæmah×aµ t÷amar÷iyæn÷a ga¼×aµ s÷usuddhaµ
S×a³gho yo sabb÷apæ¼ønaµ s÷ara¼aµ khem÷amutt÷amaµ
T÷atiyænuss÷ati¥¥hænaµ vandæm÷i taµ s×iren÷ahaµ
Sa³ghass×æh÷asmi dæso4 va sa³gho me s÷æmik×issaro
S×a³gho dukkhass÷a ghætæ c÷a v×idhætæ c÷a h×itass÷a me

1

Women chant
Women chant
3
Women chant
4
Women chant

2

dæsø.
vandantøh×aµ.
vand÷amænæya.
dæsø.

I am indeed the Dhamma’s s÷ervant, th÷e Dhamma is my L×ord ÷and Guide.
Th÷e Dhamma is sorrow’s destr÷oyer, and it bestows bl×ess×ings ÷on me.
To th÷e Dhamma I d×edicate this b÷o÷dy and life,
And in d÷evotion I w÷ill w°alk this excellent w×ay ÷of Truth.
For me there is no other r÷efuge, th÷e Dhamma is my ×excell÷ent r÷efuge.
By th÷e utterance of th÷is tr°uth, may I grow in the M×ast÷er’s Way.
By my d÷evotion to the Dh÷amma, and th÷e blessing of this pr×actice—
By i÷ ts power, may ÷all obstacles be ×ov÷ercome.
(Bowing:)
By body, speech, ÷or mind,
For whatever wr÷ong action I have c÷ommitted towards the Dh÷amma,
May my ÷acknowledgement of fault be acc×epted,
That i÷ n the future there may be r÷estraint regarding the Dh÷amma.

RECOLLECTION OF THE SANGHA
(N×ow let us chant the recollection of the S÷angha.)
[They are th÷e Blessed One’s disc×iples,] who have pr÷acticed well,
Who have practiced dir÷ectly,
Who have practiced ins×ightfully,
Th°ose who pr×actice with int÷egrity—
That is the f÷our pairs, th÷e eight kinds of n×obl÷e beings—
Th°ese are th÷e Blessed One’s disc×iples.
Such ones ÷are worthy of gifts, worthy of h÷ospit×ality, worthy of ÷offerings,
worthy ×of r÷espect;
They give ÷occasion for i÷ nc÷omparable g×oodness to ar÷ise i÷ n the world.

SUPREME PRAISE OF THE SANGHA
(N×ow let us chant the supreme praise of the S÷angha.)
[B°orn ÷of the Dh×amma,] th÷at Sangha which has pr×act÷iced well,
The field of th÷e Sangha formed ÷of e°ight kinds of n×obl÷e beings,
Guided in body ÷and m°ind ÷by excellent mor×ality and v÷irtue.
I revere that ÷assembly of n×oble beings p÷erfected in p÷urity.
Th÷e Sangha, which is the s÷upreme, s÷ecure r×efuge of a¯ll beings—
As th÷e Third Object of R÷ecoll×ection, ÷I venerate it with b×owed head.
I am indeed the Sangha’s s÷ervant, th÷e Sangha is my L×ord ÷and Guide.
Th÷e Sangha is sorrow’s destr÷oyer and it bestows bl×ess×ings ÷on me.

Sa³ghassæh×aµ niyyædemi s÷arørañjøv÷itañc÷idaµ
Vandantoh×aµ1 c÷arissæmi sa³ghasso-p÷a¥×ipann÷ataµ
Natthi me s÷ar×a¼aµ aññaµ s×a³gho me s÷ar×a¼aµ v÷araµ
Etena sacc÷avajjena vaððheyyaµ s÷atthu-s×æsane
S×a³ghaµ me vand÷amænena2 yaµ puññaµ p÷as×utaµ ÷idha
S÷abbepi ant÷aræyæ me mæh×es×uµ t÷ass×a tej÷asæ
(Bowing:)
Kæyena væcæya va cet÷as×æ væ
S×a³ghe k÷ukammaµ p÷akataµ m÷ayæ yaµ
S×a³gho p÷a¥igga¼h÷ætu acc÷ayantaµ
Kælantare s×aµvarituµ v÷a s×a³ghe
(At this time meditation is practiced in silence, sometimes followed by a
Dhamma talk, and ending with the following:)

CLOSING HOMAGE
(Arahaµ) sammæsambuddho bh÷agavæ
Buddhaµ bh÷agavantaµ ÷abh×ivædemi
(Bow.)
(Svækkh×æto) bh÷agav×atæ dhammo
Dhammaµ namassæmi
(Bow.)
(Supa¥÷ipanno) bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
S×a³ghaµ n÷amæmi
(Bow.)

1
2

Women chant vandantøh×aµ.
Women chant vand÷amænæya.

To th÷e Sangha I d×edicate this b÷od
÷ y and life,
And in d÷evotion I w÷ill w°alk the well-practiced w×ay of th÷e S÷angha.
For me there is no other r÷efuge, th÷e Sangha is my ×excell÷ent r÷efuge.
By th÷e utterance of th÷is tr°u°th, may I grow in the M×ast÷er’s Way.
By my d÷evotion to the S÷angha, and th÷e blessing ÷of this pr×actice—
By i÷ ts power, may ÷all obstacles be ×ov÷ercome.
(Bowing:)
By body, speech, ÷or mind,
For whatever wr÷ong action I have c÷ommitted towards the S÷angha,
May my ÷acknowledgement of fault be acc×epted,
That i÷ n the future there may be r÷estraint regarding the S÷angha.
(At this time meditation is practiced in silence, sometimes followed by a
Dhamma talk, and ending with the following:)

CLOSING HOMAGE
(Th÷e Lord,) th÷e Perfectly Enl×ightened and Bl÷essed One—
™÷I render homage t÷o the B×uddha, the Bl÷essed One.
(Bow.)
(Th÷e Teaching,) so c÷ompletely expl×ained by him—
I b¯ow t÷o th÷e Dh÷amma.
(Bow.)
(Th÷e Blessed One’s disc×iples,) who have pr÷acticed well—
I b¯ow t÷o th÷e S÷angha.
(Bow.)

MORNING CHANTING
Dedication of Offerings

18

Preliminary Homage

18

Homage to the Buddha

19

Homage to the Dhamma

19

Homage to the Sangha

20

Salutation to the Triple Gem

21

Closing Homage

24

DEDICATION OF OFFERINGS
(Yo so) bh÷agavæ ÷arahaµ sammæsambuddho
To the Bl÷essed One, th÷e Lord, who f×ully ÷attained perfect enl÷ightenment,
Svækkh×æto yena bh÷agav×atæ dhammo
To th÷e Teaching, which he exp÷ound÷ed so well,
Supa¥÷ipanno yassa bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
And to th÷e Blessed One’s disc×iples who have pr÷acticed well,
Tamm×ayaµ bh÷agavantaµ s÷adhammaµ s÷asa³ghaµ
To these—th÷e Buddha, th÷e Dhamma, ÷and the S×angha—
Imeh×i sakkæreh÷i yathærahaµ æropitehi ÷abh×ipþj÷ayæma
We render w÷ith offerings our r×ightful h¯omage.
Sædh×u no bhante bh÷agavæ s÷ucira-parinibb÷utopi
It is w×ell for us that the Bl÷essed One, having attained l÷iber×ation,
Pacch×imæ-j÷an×atæn×ukamp÷a-mænasæ
Still had c÷ompassion for later g×ener¯ations.
Ime sakkære dugg÷at÷a-pa¼¼ækær×a-bhþte p÷a¥igga¼hætu
May th÷ese simple× offerings be acc÷epted
Amh×ækaµ døgh÷arattaµ h÷itæya s÷ukhæya
For ÷our long-lasting benefit and f÷or the h×appiness it gi¯ves us.
Arahaµ sammæsambuddho bh÷agavæ
Th÷e Lord, th÷e Perfectly Enl×ightened and Bl÷essed One—
Buddhaµ bh÷agavantaµ ÷abh×ivædemi
÷I render homage t÷o the B×uddha, the Bl÷essed One.
(Bow.)
(Svækkh×æto) bh÷agav×atæ dhammo
Th÷e Teaching, so c÷ompletely expl×ained by him—
Dhammaµ namassæmi
I b¯ow t÷o th÷e Dh÷amma.
(Bow.)
(Supa¥÷ipanno) bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
Th÷e Blessed One’s disc×iples, who have pr÷acticed well—
S×a³ghaµ n÷amæmi
I b¯ow t÷o th÷e S÷angha.
(Bow.)

PRELIMINARY HOMAGE
(H×anda mayaµ buddhassa bh÷agavato pubbabhæga-namak÷æraµ
karomase)
[N×ow let us pay preliminary homage to the B÷uddha.]
(Namo tassa) bh÷agavato arah÷ato s×ammæs×ambuddh÷assa
(Three times.)
H×om×age to th÷e Bl÷essed, N×oble, ÷and P÷erfectly Enl×ightened One. (Three times.)

HOMAGE TO THE BUDDHA
(H×anda mayaµ buddhæbh÷itth÷utiµ karomase)
[N×ow let us chant in praise of the B÷uddha.]
(Yo so) tath×æg÷ato ÷arahaµ sammæsambuddho
The Tathægata is the P×ure One, th÷e Perfectly Enl×ightened One.
Vijjæc÷ara¼×a-sampanno
He is ÷impeccable ÷in conduct and ÷underst×anding,
S÷ug÷ato
The Acc×omplished One,
Lok÷av×idþ
Th÷e Knower ×of th÷e Worlds.
An×utt÷aro puris÷adamma-særathi
He trains perfectly th÷ose who w×ish t×o b÷e trained.
Satthæ deva-m÷anussænaµ
He is Teacher of g×ods and h÷umans.
Buddho bh÷agavæ
He is Awake and H÷oly.
Yo imaµ lokaµ s÷adevakaµ s÷amærakaµ s÷abrahm÷akaµ
In this world with ÷its gods, demons, ÷and kind sp×irits,
Sass×ama¼a-bræhma¼iµ p÷ajaµ s÷adeva-m÷anuss×aµ s÷ayaµ ÷abhiññæ sacchik÷at×væ p÷avedesi
Its s×eekers and s÷ages, c÷elestial and hum×an beings, he has by d÷eep insight rev×ealed
th÷e Truth.
Yo dhammaµ des×esi ÷æd×i-kalyæ¼aµ majjh×e-k÷alyæ¼aµ p÷ariyosæna-÷kalyæ¼aµ
He has pointed out the Dh÷amma: beautiful in the beg÷inning, beautiful in the m×iddle,
beautiful ÷in th×e end.
Sætth×aµ s÷abyañja¼aµ kevala-p÷ar×ipu¼¼aµ p÷ar×isuddhaµ brahma-c÷ar×iyaµ p÷akæsesi
He has explained the Sp×ir×it÷ual Life of c÷omplete p×urity in its ×essence and conv÷entions.
Tamah×aµ bh÷agavantaµ ÷abh×ipþj÷ayæmi tamah×aµ bh÷agavantaµ s÷iras×æ n÷amæmi
I chant ÷my praise t÷o the Bl×essed One, I bow ÷my head t÷o th×e Bl×essed One.
(Bow.)

HOMAGE TO THE DHAMMA
(H×anda mayaµ dhammæbh÷itth÷utiµ karomase)
[N×ow let us chant in praise of the Dh÷amma.]
(Yo so) svækkh×æto bh÷agav×atæ dhammo
Th÷e Dhamma is w÷ell exp×ounded by the Bl÷essed One,
S×andi¥¥h÷iko
Apparent here ÷and now,
÷Akæl÷iko
Timeless,
Eh÷ipass÷iko
÷Encouraging inv÷estig×ation,

Opanay÷iko
Leading ÷inwards,
P÷acc÷attaµ ved×it÷abbo viññþhi
To be ÷experienced ind÷ividually b×y th÷e wise.
Tamah×aµ dhammaµ ÷abh×ipþj÷ayæmi tamah×aµ dhammaµ s÷iras×æ n÷amæmi
I chant ÷my praise t÷o this T×eaching, I bow ÷my head t÷o th×is Truth.
(Bow.)

HOMAGE TO THE SANGHA
(H×anda mayaµ sa³ghæbh÷itth÷utiµ karomase)
[N×ow let us chant in praise of the S÷angha.]
(Yo so) supa¥÷ipanno bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
They are th÷e Blessed One’s disc×iples, who have pr÷acticed well,
Ujupa¥÷ipanno bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷a sa³gho
Who have practiced dir÷ectly,
Ñæyapa¥÷ipanno bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷a sa³gho
Who have practiced ins×ightfully,
S×æmøc÷ip÷a¥÷ipanno bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷a sa³gho
Those who pr×actice with int÷egrity—
Yadidaµ cattæri puris÷ayugæni a¥¥h×a puris÷apugg÷alæ
That is the f÷our pairs, th÷e eight kinds of n×oble beings—
Esa bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷a sa³gho
These are th÷e Blessed One’s disc×iples.
Æh÷u¼eyyo
Such ones ÷are worthy of gifts,
Pæh÷u¼eyyo
Worthy of hospit×ality,
Dakkh÷i¼eyyo
Worthy of ÷offerings,
Añj÷ali-k÷ar×a¼øyo
Worthy ×of r÷espect;
An×utt÷araµ puññakkh÷ettaµ lokassa
They give ÷occasion for ÷incomparable g×oodness to ar÷ise ÷in the world.
Tamah×aµ sa³ghaµ ÷abh×ipþj÷ayæmi tamah×aµ sa³ghaµ s÷iras×æ n÷amæmi
I chant ÷my praise t÷o this S×angha, I bow ÷my head t÷o th×is S×angha.
(Bow.)

SALUTATION TO THE TRIPLE GEM
(H×anda mayaµ ratanattaya-pa¼æma-gæth×æyo ceva s×aµvega-parikittana-pæ¥hañc÷a
bha¼æmase)
[N×ow let us chant our salutation to the Tr÷iple Gem and a passage of enc×ouragement.]
(Buddho s÷usuddho) k÷aru¼æmah×a¼¼avo
The B÷uddha, absolute÷ly pure, with ×ocean-like comp÷assion,
Yoccant÷a-suddhabb÷ara-ñæ¼÷a-loc÷ano
Possessing th÷e clear sight of w÷isdom,
Lokass÷a pæpþp÷ak×iles÷a-ghæt÷ako
Destroyer ÷of worldly s÷elf-corr×uption—
Vandæm×i buddhaµ ÷ah×amæd÷aren÷a taµ
Devot×edly ÷indeed, that Buddha ×I r÷evere.
Dhammo p÷adøpo v÷iya tass÷a satth÷uno
The Teaching of th÷e Lord, like a lamp,
Yo magg×apækæm÷at÷a-bhed÷a-bhinn÷ako
Illuminating th÷e Path and its Fruit: the D÷eathless,
Lokuttaro yo c÷a t÷adatth÷a-døp÷ano
That which is bey×ond the cond÷itioned world—
Vandæm×i dhammaµ ÷ah×amæd÷aren÷a taµ
Devot×edly ÷indeed, that Dhamma ×I r÷evere.
S×a³gho s÷ukhettæbhyati-kh÷etta-s×aññito
Th÷e Sangha, the m÷ost fertile gr×ound for cultiv÷ation,
Yo di¥¥h×asanto s÷ug÷atæn÷ubodh÷ako
Those who have real÷ized Peace, awakened after th÷e Acc×omplished One,
Lolapp÷ahøno ÷ar×iyo s÷umedh÷aso
N×oble ÷and wise, all longing ab÷andoned—
Vandæm×i sa³ghaµ ÷ah×amæd÷aren÷a taµ
Devot×edly ÷indeed, that Sangha ×I r÷evere.
Iccevam-ekant÷abh×ipþj÷a-neyy÷akaµ
This salutation should b÷e made
Vatthuttayaµ vand÷ay÷atæbh÷isa³kh÷ataµ
To th×at which is w÷orthy.
Puññaµ m÷ayæ yaµ m÷am÷a sabb÷upadd÷avæ
Through th÷e power of s÷uch good ×action,
Mæ h×ont÷u ve tass÷a p÷abhæv÷asiddh÷iyæ
May ÷all obstacles d×is÷appear.
Idha tath×æg÷ato loke ÷uppanno ÷arahaµ sammæsambuddho
One who knows things as th÷ey are has come int×o th÷is world; and he is an ÷Arahant,
÷a perfectly aw×akened being.

Dhammo c÷a des÷ito niyyæn÷iko ÷up÷as÷amiko p÷arinibbæn÷iko s×ambodh÷agæmø s÷ug÷atapp÷aved÷ito
Purifying th÷e way leading ÷out ÷of d÷el÷usion, calming and d÷irecting to p×erfect peace,
and leading to enl÷ightenment—this Way he h×as m÷ade known.
M×ayantaµ dhammaµ s÷utvæ evaµ jænæma
Having heard th÷e Teaching, we kn÷ow this:
Jætip÷i dukkhæ
Birth is d÷ukkha,
Jaræp÷i dukkhæ
Ageing is d÷ukkha,
M÷ara¼amp÷i dukkhaµ
And death is d÷ukkha;
S×oka-p÷arideva-dukkh÷a-domanass÷upæyæs×æp÷i dukkhæ
S×orrow, lament÷ation, pain, grief, and d÷espair are d÷ukkha;
Appiyeh÷i s×amp÷ayogo dukkho
Assoc÷iation with th÷e d÷isliked is d÷ukkha;
Piyeh÷i v×ipp÷ayogo dukkho
Sep×aration from th÷e liked is d÷ukkha;
Yampicch×aµ n÷a labhati tamp÷i dukkhaµ
Not attaining one’s w×ishes is d÷ukkha.
S×a³khittena pañc÷upædænakkh×andhæ dukkhæ
In brief, th÷e five focuses of the gr×asping mind are d÷ukkha.
Seyy÷athødaµ
These are as f÷ollows:
Rþpþpædæn÷akkh×andho
Identification with the b÷ody,
Vedanþpædæn÷akkh×andho
Identification with f×eeling,
S×aññþpædæn÷akkh×andho
Identification with perc÷eption,
S×a³kh×ærþpædæn÷akkh×andho
Identification with mental format×ions,
Viññæ¼þpædæn÷akkh×andho
Identification with c×onsci÷ousness.
Yesaµ p÷ariññæya
For th÷e c÷omplete underst×anding of this,
Dh÷aramæno s×o bh÷agavæ
Th÷e Bl÷essed One in his l÷ifetime
Evaµ b÷ahulaµ s×æv÷ake v÷ineti
Frequently ÷instructed his disc×iples in just th÷is way.
Evaµ bhægæ c÷a panassa bh÷agav÷ato s×æv÷akesu ÷anus×æs÷anø b÷ahulæ p÷avatt÷ati
In addition, he f÷urth÷er ÷instr÷ucted:

Rþpaµ ÷aniccaµ
The body is imp÷ermanent,
Vedanæ ÷aniccæ
Feeling is imp÷ermanent,
S×aññæ ÷aniccæ
Perc×eption is imp÷ermanent,
S×a³kh×æræ ÷aniccæ
Mental formations are imp÷ermanent,
Viññæ¼aµ ÷aniccaµ
C×onsciousness is imp÷ermanent;
Rþpaµ ÷anattæ
The body is n÷ot-self,
Vedanæ ÷anattæ
Feeling is n÷ot-self,
S×aññæ ÷anattæ
Perc×eption is n÷ot-self,
S×a³kh×æræ ÷anattæ
Mental formations are n÷ot-self,
Viññæ¼aµ ÷anattæ
C×onsciousness is n÷ot-self;
S÷abbe s×a³kh×æræ ÷aniccæ
All conditions are imp÷ermanent,
S÷abbe dhammæ ÷anattæ ti
There is n÷o self in the cr÷eated or the u
÷ ncr×eated.
Te m×ayaµ
All of us
Oti¼¼æmha-jæt÷iyæ j÷aræmara¼ena
Are bound ÷by birth, ageing, ÷and death,
S×okeh÷i p÷arideveh÷i dukkh×eh÷i domanasseh÷i ÷upæyæsehi
By s×orrow, lament÷ation, pain, grief, and d÷espair,
Dukkh×oti¼¼æ dukkh÷ap÷aretæ
B×ound by dukkha and obstr÷uct÷ed ÷by d÷ukkha.
Appevanæm×imass÷a kevalass÷a dukkhakkh×andhass÷a ant÷akir×iyæ paññæyethæ ti
Let us all ÷aspire to c÷omplete fr×eedom from s÷uffering.
C×ir×aparinibbutamp×itaµ bh÷agav×antaµ sar÷a¼aµ g÷atæ
The Blessed One, who long ago attained Parinibb×æna, is our refuge.
Dh×ammañca S×a¼ghañca
So too are the Dh×amma and the S÷angha.
Tassa bh÷agavato s×æsanaµ yath×æsati yath×æbalaµ manasik÷aroma ÷anupa¥ip×ajjæma
Attentively we f×ollow the pathway of that Bl÷essed One, with °a°ll of our
m×indfulness ÷and strength.

Sæ sæ n÷o pa¥×ipatti
May then the cultiv×ation of this pr÷actice
Imass÷a kevalass÷a dukkhakkh×andhass÷a ant÷akir×iyæya s×aµv×att÷atu
Lead us to th÷e end of ×ev°e°ry kind of s÷uffering.
(An alternative version of the preceding section, chanted only by monks and nuns:)
C×ir×apar÷inibbutamp×i taµ bh÷agav×antaµ uddissa ÷arah×antaµ sammæsambuddhaµ
Remembering the Bl÷essed One, th÷e Noble Lord, ÷and Perfectly Enl×ightened One,
who long ago attained P÷ar÷in÷ibb÷æna,
Saddhæ ÷agærasmæ anagær×iyaµ pabb÷aj÷itæ
We have gone forth w÷ith fa°ith from home to h×omelessness,
Tasm×iµ bh÷agavati brahma-c÷ar×iyaµ c÷aræma
And like the Bl÷essed One, we practice the H×ol™y Life,
Bhikkh×þnaµ1 s×ikkhæs÷æjøv÷a-samæpannæ
Being fully ÷equipped with th÷e bhikkhus’ 2 s×ystem of tr÷aining.
Taµ no brahma-c÷ar×iyaµ imass÷a kevalass÷a dukkhakkh×andhass÷a ant÷akir×iyæya s×aµv×att÷atu
May this H÷oly Life lead us to th÷e end of this wh×ole mass of s÷uffering.

(After a period of silent meditation, additional reflections may be chanted [see pages 25–
41]. Then end with the chant below.)

CLOSING HOMAGE
(Arahaµ) sammæsambuddho bh÷agavæ
Th÷e Lord, th÷e Perfectly Enl×ightened and Bl÷essed One—
Buddhaµ bh÷agavantaµ ÷abh×ivædemi
÷I render homage t÷o the B×uddha, the Bl÷essed One.
(Bow.)
(Svækkh×æto) bh÷agav×atæ dhammo
Th÷e Teaching, so c÷ompletely expl×ained by him—
Dhammaµ namassæmi
I b¯ow t÷o th÷e Dh÷amma.
(Bow.)
(Supa¥÷ipanno) bh÷agav÷ato sævak÷asa³gho
Th÷e Blessed One’s disc×iples, who have pr÷acticed well—
S×a³ghaµ n÷amæmi
I b¯ow t÷o th÷e S÷angha.
(Bow.)

1
2

Nuns chant: Søladhær×ønaµ
nuns’

PART TWO: REFLECTIONS AND RECOLLECTIONS
Reflections on Sharing Blessings

26

The Buddha’s Words on Loving-Kindness

28

Suffusion with the Divine Abidings

30

The Highest Blessings

32

Reflections on Universal Well-Being

34

Reflections on the Four Requisites

36

Reflections on the Thirty-Two Parts

37

Five Subjects for Frequent Recollection

39

Ten Subjects for Frequent Recollection by One
Who Has Gone Forth

40

REFLECTIONS ON SHARING BLESSINGS
(H×anda mayaµ uddissanædhi¥¥hæna-gæth×æyo bha¼æmase)
[Iminæ puññakammena] upajjhæyæ g÷u¼utt÷aræ
Æcariyþpakæræ c÷a mætæp÷itæ c÷a ñæt÷akæ
Suriyo cand×imæ ræjæ g÷u¼avantæ n÷aræp÷i c÷a
Brahma-mæræ c÷a indæ c÷a lokapælæ c÷a dev÷atæ
Yamo mittæ m÷anussæ c÷a majjhattæ ver÷ikæp÷i c÷a
S÷abbe sattæ s÷ukhø hontu puññæni p÷ak÷atæni me
Sukhañca tividhaµ dent÷u khippaµ pæpeth÷a vom÷ataµ
Iminæ puññakammen÷a i÷ minæ uddissen÷a c÷a
Khippæhaµ s÷ul÷abhe ceva ta¼hþpædæn÷a-ched÷anaµ
Ye santæne hønæ dhammæ yæv÷a nibbæn÷ato mamaµ
Nassantu sabb÷adæ yeva yatth÷a jæto bh÷ave bh÷ave
Ujucittaµ s÷at÷ipaññæ sallekho v÷ir÷iyamhinæ
Mæræ labhant™u nokæsam kætuñca v÷ir÷iyes÷u me
Buddhædhip÷av÷aro nætho dhammo nætho v™arutt™amo
Nætho paccek÷abuddho c÷a sa³gho næthott÷aro mamaµ
Tesottamænubhævena mærokæsaµ l÷abhant÷u mæ

(Now let us chant the verses of sharing and aspir÷ation.)
Through th÷e goodness that ar×ises from my pr÷actice,
May ÷my spiritual t×eachers and gu°ides of great v÷irtue,
÷My mother, my f×ather, and my r÷elatives,
The Sun ÷and th×e Moon, and ÷all v°irtuous l×eaders of th÷e world,
May th÷e highest gods and evil f÷orces,
Cel÷esti×al beings, gu°ardian sp×irits of th÷e Earth, and the L÷ord ×of Death,
May those wh÷o are fri×endly, indifferent, or h÷ostile,
May ÷all beings receive the bl×ess×ings of ÷my life.
May th÷ey soon attain the thr×eef÷old bliss and realize the D÷eathless.
Through th÷e goodness that ar×ises from my pr÷actice,
And through this act of sh÷aring,
May all d÷esires and att×achments quick÷ly cease
And ÷all harmful st÷ates ×of mind.
Until I realize Nibb÷æna,
In every kind ÷of birth, may I h÷ave an ×upr÷ight mind,
W÷ith mindfulness and w÷isdom, aust×erity and v÷igor.
May th÷e forces of del×usion not t÷ake hold nor weaken ÷my r×esolve.
Th÷e Buddha is my ×excellent r÷efuge,
Uns÷urpassed is the prot×ection of the Dhamm÷a,
Th÷e Solitary B×uddha is my n÷oble Lord,
Th÷e Sangha is my supr×eme s÷upport.
Through th÷e supreme p×ow×er of ÷all these,
M÷ay darkness and del×usion be d÷ispelled.

THE BUDDHA’S WORDS ON LOVING-KINDNESS
(Kara¼øya Mettæ Sutta)
(Now let us chant the Buddha’s words on loving-k÷indness.)
[This is what should b÷e done]
By one wh÷o is sk×illed in g÷oodness
And who knows the p÷ath of peace:
Let them b÷e able and ×upright,
Str÷aightforward and gentl×e ÷in speech,
Humble and not conc÷eited,
C÷ontented and ×easily s÷atisfied,
Unburdened with d÷uties and frugal ×in th÷eir ways.
Peaceful and calm, ÷and wise and sk×illful,
N÷ot proud and dem×anding in n÷ature.
Let them n°ot d÷o the sl×ight÷est thing
That th÷e wise would lat×er r÷eprove,
Wishing: In gladness ÷and in s×afety,
May ÷all beings b×e ÷at ease.
Whatever liv÷ing beings there m÷ay be,
Whether th÷ey are w×eak ÷or strong, om÷itting none,
The great or the m÷ighty, medium, sh×ort, ÷or small,
The seen and the ÷unseen,
Those living near and f×ar ÷away,
Those born and t÷o b×e born,
May ÷all beings b×e ÷at ease.
Let none dec¯eive ÷an÷other
Or d÷espise a÷ny being in ×a÷ny state.
Let n°one through anger or ÷ill-will
Wish h×arm upon an÷other.
Even as ÷a moth°er protects with h÷er life
Her child, her ÷onl×y child,
S°o with a b×oundless heart
Should ÷one cherish all l×iv÷ing beings,
Radiating k×indn°e°ss over th÷e ent×ir÷e world:
Spreading upwards to the sk×ies
And d÷ownw÷ards t÷o th×e depths,
Outwards and unb÷ounded,
Fr÷eed from h×atr×ed and ÷ill-will.

Whether standing or w÷alking, seated or l×y÷ing down,
Free from dr÷owsiness,
One should s÷ustain this r÷ecoll×ection.
This is said t÷o b°e th÷e subl×ime ab÷iding.
By not holding to f÷ixed views,
Th÷e pure-h×eart÷ed one, having clarity of v÷ision,
Being freed fr÷om all s×ense-desires,
Is not b×orn ×again int÷o this world.

SUFFUSION WITH THE DIVINE ABIDINGS
(H×anda mayaµ caturappamaññæ obhæsanaµ karomase)
[Mettæ-s÷ah÷ag÷atena] cetasæ ekaµ disaµ ph÷ar÷it÷væ vih÷ar÷ati
T÷athæ dutiyaµ t÷athæ tatiyaµ t÷athæ c÷atutthaµ
Iti uddhamadho tiriyaµ sabb÷adh÷i sabbatt÷atæya
Sabbævantaµ lokaµ mettæ-s÷ah÷ag÷atena cetasæ
Vipulena mahagg÷atena app÷amæ¼ena ÷averena ÷abyæpajjhena
ph÷ar÷it÷væ vih÷ar÷ati
Karu¼æ-s÷ah÷ag÷atena cetasæ ekaµ disaµ ph÷ar÷it÷væ vih÷ar÷ati
T÷athæ dutiyaµ t÷athæ tatiyaµ t÷athæ c÷atutthaµ
Iti uddhamadho tiriyaµ sabb÷adh÷i sabbatt÷atæya
Sabbævantaµ lokaµ k÷ar÷u¼æ-s÷ah÷ag÷atena cetasæ
Vipulena mahagg÷atena app÷amæ¼ena ÷averena ÷abyæpajjhena
ph÷ar÷it÷væ vih÷ar÷ati
Mud×itæ-s÷ah÷ag÷atena cetasæ ekaµ disaµ ph÷ar÷it÷væ vih÷ar÷ati
T÷athæ dutiyaµ t÷athæ tatiyaµ t÷athæ c÷atutthaµ
Iti uddhamadho tiriyaµ sabb÷adh÷i sabbatt÷atæya
Sabbævantaµ lokaµ m÷ud÷itæ-s÷ah÷ag÷atena cetasæ
Vipulena mahagg÷atena app÷amæ¼ena ÷averena ÷abyæpajjhena
ph÷ar÷it÷væ vih÷ar÷ati
Upekkhæ-sah÷ag÷at÷ena cetasæ ekaµ disaµ ph÷ar÷it÷væ vih÷ar÷ati
T÷athæ dutiyaµ t÷athæ tatiyaµ t÷athæ c÷atutthaµ
Iti uddhamadho tiriyaµ sabb÷adh÷i sabbatt÷atæya
Sabbævantaµ lokaµ ÷up÷ekkhæ-s÷ah÷ag÷atena cetasæ
Vipulena mahagg÷atena app÷amæ¼ena ÷averena ÷abyæpajjhena
ph÷ar÷it÷væ vih÷ar÷atø ti

(Now let us make the Four Boundless Qualities shine forth.)
[°I w×ill abide] pervading o÷ne quarter with a °m°in°d imbued with loving-k×indness;
likew×ise the second, likew×ise the third, likewise t÷he fourth;
so above and b÷elow, around and e×ver÷ywhere; and to ×a°ll ×as to ÷myself.
°I w×ill abide pervading the all-encomp×assing world with a °m°in°d imbued
with loving-k÷indness;
ab×undant, ex×alted, imm÷easurable, without h÷ostility, and without ÷ill-°w°i°ll.
°I w×ill abide pervading o÷ne quarter with a °m°in°d imbued with comp×assion;
likew×ise the second, likew×ise the third, likewise t÷he fourth;
so above and b÷elow, around and e×ver÷ywhere; and to ×a°ll ×as to ÷myself.
°I w×ill abide pervading the all-encomp×assing world with a °m°in°d imbued
with comp÷assion;
ab×undant, ex×alted, imm÷easurable, without h÷ostility, and without ÷ill-°w°i°ll.
°I w×ill abide pervading o÷ne quarter with a °m°in°d imbued with gl×adness;
likew×ise the second, likew×ise the third, likewise t÷he fourth;
so above and b÷elow, around and e×ver÷ywhere; and to ×a°ll ×as to ÷myself.
°I w×ill abide pervading the all-encomp×assing world with a °m°in°d imbued
with gl÷adness;
ab×undant, ex×alted, imm÷easurable, without h÷ostility, and without ÷ill-°w°i°ll.
°I w×ill abide pervading o÷ne quarter with a °m°in°d imbued with equanim×ity;
likew×ise the second, likew×ise the third, likewise t÷he fourth;
so above and b÷elow, around and e×ver÷ywhere; and to ×a°ll ×as to ÷myself.
°I w×ill abide pervading the all-encomp×assing world with a °m°in°d imbued
with equan÷imity;
ab×undant, ex×alted, imm÷easurable, without h÷ostility, and without ÷ill-°w°i°ll.

THE HIGHEST BLESSINGS
(Ma³gala Sutta)
(T°h°us have I h°e°a°rd that the Bl÷essed One)
Was staying at S×æv÷atthø,
Res°i°ding at the Jeta’s Grove
In Anæthap×i¼ðik÷a’s park.
T°h°en in the d°a°rk of the ni°g°ht, a r×adi÷ant d÷eva
Il°l°u°minated °a°ll J×et÷a’s Grove.
She b°o°wed down l°o°w before the Bl÷essed One
Then standing to one s×ide sh÷e said:
“D°e°vas are conc°e°r°ned for h×appiness
And ever l×ong f÷or peace.
The same is true for h×umankind.
What t°h°en are the h×ighest bl÷essings?”
“÷Av÷oiding those of fo÷olish ways,
÷Ass÷ociating w×ith th÷e wise,
And h÷onoring those w×orthy of h÷onor.
T°h°e°se are the h×ighest bl÷essings.
“L÷iving in places of suitable kinds,
With the fru÷its of past go÷od deeds
÷And gu÷ided by the r×ightf÷ul way.
T°h°e°se are the h×ighest bl÷essings.
“°Acc÷omplished in l÷earn÷ing ÷and cr÷aftsman’s skills,
With d÷iscip°l°i°ne, high÷ly trained,
And s°p°e°e°ch that is tr°ue and pl×easant t÷o h°e°ar.
T°h°e°se are the h×ighest bl÷essings.
“Prov÷iding for mother and father’s support
And c°h°×e°ri°shing family,
And ways of work that h×arm n÷o being,
T°h°e°se are the h×ighest bl÷essings.
“G÷enerosity and a r÷ighteous life,
Offering h°e°lp to r×elat÷ives and kin,
And acting in ways that l×eave n÷o bl°a°m°e.
T°h°e°se are the h×ighest bl÷essings.
“Steadfast in r÷estraint, and shunning ×evil ways,
Av÷oiding int×oxicants that d÷ull the mind,
And heedf÷uln°e°ss in all things th×at arise.
T°h°e°se are the h×ighest bl÷essings.

“Resp÷ectfuln°e°ss and of humble ways,
Contentment and gr×atitude,
And hearing the Dh÷am°m°a fr×equent÷ly t°a°u°ght.
T°h°e°se are the h×ighest bl÷essings.
“Patience and wil÷lingn°e°ss to accept one’s faults,
Seeing venerated s×eekers of th÷e truth,
And sharing ÷oft°e°n the w×ords of Dh÷am°ma° .
T°h°e°se are the h×ighest bl÷essings.
“÷Ardent, committed to the H÷oly Life,
Seeing for ones×elf the Nobl÷e T°r°u°ths
And the realization of Nibb÷æna.
T°h°e°se are the h×ighest bl÷essings.
“Although in°v÷o°lved i÷ n w÷orldly tasks,
Unsh÷aken the m×ind ÷remains
And beyond all s÷orrow, sp×otless, s÷ec°u°re.
T°h°e°se are the h×ighest bl÷essings.
“Th÷ey who l°i°ve by f÷ollowing this path
Know v÷ictory wh×erever th÷ey go,
And every p°l°a°ce for them i÷ s s°a°fe.
T°h°e°se are the h×ighest bl÷essings.”

REFLECTIONS ON UNIVERSAL WELL-BEING
(H×anda mayam brahmavihæraphara¼aµ karomase)
[Ah×aµ sukhito h×omi], niddukkho h×omi, ÷avero h×omi, abyæpajjho h×omi, anøgho h×omi,
sukh×ø ÷attænaµ p÷arih×aræmi.
S÷abbe s÷attæ sukhitæ h×ontu, s÷abbe s÷attæ averæ h×ontu, s÷abbe s÷attæ abyæpajjhæ h×ontu,
s÷abbe s÷attæ anøghæ h×ontu, s÷abbe s÷attæ sukh×ø ÷attænaµ p÷arih×arantu.
S÷abbe s÷attæ sabbadukkhæ pamucc×antu.
S÷abbe s÷attæ mæ laddha-s×amp÷att×ito vigacch×antu.
S÷abbe s÷attæ kammass÷akæ kamm×adæyædæ kamm×ayonø kamm×abandhþ kammap÷a¥is×ar÷a¼æ,
yaµ kammaµ k÷ariss×anti kalyæ¼aµ væ pæp÷akaµ væ tass÷a dæyædæ bh÷aviss×anti.

(Now let us chant the reflections on universal w÷ell-being.)

[May I ab÷ide in w×ell-being], in fr÷eedom fr×om affliction, in fr÷eedom fr×om h÷ost×ility, in
fr÷eedom fr×om ÷ill-will, in fr÷eedom fr×om ÷anx×iety, and may I m°aint¯ain w¯ell-b×eing in ÷myself.
May everyone ab÷ide in w×ell-being, in fr÷eedom fr×om h÷ost×ility, in fr÷eedom fr×om ÷ill-will,
in fr÷eedom fr×om ÷anx×iety, and may they m°aint¯ain w¯ell-b×eing in th÷emselves.
May a°ll beings be rel¯eased fr÷om a÷ ll s×uffering.
And may they not be p×arted from th÷e go°od f×ort°une they have ÷attained.

When they act upon int÷ention, a°ll beings ÷are the ×owners of their ÷action and inh×erit its
r÷esults. Their fut×ure is born from such ÷action, comp×anion to such ÷action, and its res°ults
will b¯e th×eir home. A°ll a× ctions with int÷ention, be th×ey s°k°illful or h×armful, of s÷uch a°cts the
will b÷e th×e heirs.

REFLECTION ON THE FOUR REQUISITES
(H×anda mayaµ ta³kha¼ika-paccav÷ekkha¼a-pæ¥haµ bha¼æmase)
[Pa¥isa³khæ] yoniso cøv÷araµ p÷a¥is×evæmi, yævadeva s×øtass÷a p÷a¥ighætæya, u¼hassa
p÷a¥ighætæya, ðaµsa-mak÷as÷a-vætæt÷ap÷a-siriµsapa-samphassænaµ p÷a¥ighætæya, yævadeva
hir×ikopina-p÷a¥icchæd÷anatthaµ.
Wisely reflecting, I use th÷e robe: only to ward ÷off cold, to ward ÷off heat, to ward off the
touch ÷of flies, m÷osquitoes, wind, b÷urn÷ing and cr×eeping things, only for the s×ake of
m÷odesty.
Pa¥isa³khæ yoniso pi¼ð÷apætaµ p÷a¥is×evæmi, neva d÷avæya, na m÷adæya, na ma¼ð÷anæya, n÷a
v×ibhþs÷anæya, yævadeva ×imass÷a kæyass÷a ¥h÷itiyæ, yæp÷anæya, vihiµs÷þpar×at÷iyæ,
bramhac÷ar×iyænugg÷ahæya, iti puræ¼añc÷a ved×anaµ p÷a¥ih×a³khæmi, navañc÷a ved×anaµ na
uppædessæmi, yætræ c÷a me bhavissati ÷anavajjatæ c÷a phæsuvihæro cæ ti.
Wisely reflecting, I use ÷almsfood: not f÷or fun, not for pl÷easure, not for f÷attening, not for
beautific×ation, only for th÷e maintenance and n×ourishment of this b÷ody, for keeping it
h÷ealthy, for helping with the H×oly Life; think÷ing thus, “ I will allay h×unger without
over÷eating, so that I may c÷ontinue to live bl×amelessly and ÷at ease.”
Pa¥isa³khæ yoniso senæs÷anaµ p÷a¥is×evæmi, yævadeva s×øtass÷a p÷a¥ighætæya, u¼hassa
p÷a¥ighætæya, ðaµsa-mak÷as÷a-vætæt÷ap÷a-siriµsapa-samphassænaµ p÷a¥ighætæya, yævadeva
utup÷arissaya v÷inodanaµ p÷a¥is×allænæræmatthaµ.
Wisely reflecting, I use the l÷odging: only to ward ÷off cold, to ward ÷off heat, to ward off
the touch ÷of flies, m÷osquitoes, wind, b÷urn÷ing and cr×eeping things, only to remove th÷e
danger from w÷eather, and f÷or living in secl×usion.
Pa¥isa³khæ yoniso g÷ilæna-pacc÷ay÷a-bhesajja-p÷arikkhæraµ p÷a¥is×evæmi, yævadeva
upp×annænaµ veyyæbædh÷ikænaµ ved÷anænaµ p÷a¥ighætæya, ÷abyæpajjha-p÷aramatæyæ ti.
Wisely reflecting, I use s÷upports for the sick and m÷edicinal r×equisites: only to ward off
p÷ainful f×eelings that have ar÷isen, for th÷e maximum fr×eedom from d÷isease.

REFLECTION ON THE THIRTY-TWO PARTS
(H×anda mayaµ dvattiµsækæra-pæ¥haµ bha¼æmase)
[Ayaµ kho] me kæyo uddhaµ pæd÷at÷alæ adho kesamatthakæ t÷a÷cap÷ar÷iyanto pþro
nænapp÷akærass÷a ÷as÷uc÷ino
This, which is my body, from the soles of the feet up, and down from the crown of the
head, is a sealed bag of skin filled with unattractive things.
Atthi imasmiµ kæye
kesæ
lomæ
nakhæ
dantæ
taco
maµsaµ
nahærþ
a¥¥hø
a¥¥himiñjaµ
vakkaµ
hadayaµ
yakanaµ
kilomakaµ
pihakaµ
papphæsaµ
antaµ
antagu¼aµ
udariyaµ
karøsaµ
pittaµ
semhaµ
pubbo
lohitaµ
sedo
medo
assu
vasæ
khe¹o
si³ghæ¼ikæ
lasikæ
muttaµ
m÷atth÷alu³gan ti

In this body there are:
hair of the head
hair of the body
nails
teeth
skin
flesh
sinews
bones
bone marrow
kidneys
heart
liver
membranes
spleen
lungs
bowels
entrails
undigested food
excrement
bile
phlegm
pus
blood
sweat
fat
tears
grease
spittle
mucus
oil of the joints
urine
brain.

Evam ayaµ me kæyo uddhaµ pæd÷at÷alæ adho kesamatthakæ t÷a÷cap÷ar÷iyanto pþro
nænapp÷akærass÷a ÷as÷uc÷ino
This, then, which is my body, from the soles of the feet up, and down from the crown of
the head, is a sealed bag of skin filled with unattractive things.

FIVE SUBJECTS FOR FREQUENT RECOLLECTION
(H×anda mayaµ ÷abhi¼ha-paccav÷ekkha¼a-pæ¥haµ bha¼æmase)
[Jaræ-dhammomh÷i] jaraµ ÷an÷atøto1
I am of the nature t÷o age, I have not g×one beyond ÷ageing.
Byædh×i-dhammomh÷i byædhiµ ÷an÷atøto2
I am of the nature to s÷icken, I have not g×one beyond sickness.
M÷ara¼a-dhammomh÷i m÷ara¼aµ ÷an÷atøto3
I am of the nature t÷o die, I have not g×one beyond ÷dying.
S÷abbehi me p÷iyehi m÷anæpeh÷i nænæbhævo v÷inæbhævo
All that ÷is mine, b÷eloved and pl×easing, will become ÷otherwise, will become
s×eparated fr÷om me.

Kammass÷akomhi4 kamm×adæyædo5 kamm÷ayoni kamm÷abandhu kamma-p÷a¥is×arano.6
Yaµ kammaµ k÷arissæmi kalyæ¼aµ væ pæp÷akaµ væ tass÷a dæyædo7 bh÷avissæmi
I am th÷e owner of my k÷amma, heir to my k÷amma, born of my k÷amma, related to my
k÷amma, ÷abide supp×orted by my k÷amma. Whatever kamma I sh÷all do, for good or f÷or ill
of th°at I will b÷e th×e heir.
Evaµ amheh÷i ÷abhi¼haµ pacc÷avekkh×itabbaµ
Th°us we sh÷ould frequently r×ec÷ollect.

1

Women chant
Women chant
3
Women chant
4
Women chant
5
Women chant
6
Women chant
7
Women chant

2

a÷ n÷atøtæ.
÷an÷atøtæ.
a÷ n÷atøtæ.
Kammass÷akæmhi.
kamm×adæyædæ.
p÷a¥is×aranæ.
dæyædæ.

TEN SUBJECTS FOR FREQUENT RECOLLECTION
BY ONE WHO HAS GONE FORTH
(H×anda mayaµ pabbajita-÷abhi¼ha-paccav÷ekkha¼a-p÷æ¥haµ bha¼æmase)
[Dasa ÷ime bhikkhave] dhammæ pabb÷ajitena ÷abhi¼haµ pacc÷avekkh×itabbæ. K÷at÷ame dasa?
Bhikkhus, there are t÷en dhammas which should be r÷eflected upon again and ÷again
by one who h÷as g×one forth. Wh°at ÷are these ten?
‘Veva¼¼÷iyamhi ajjhþp÷ag÷ato’ ti pabb÷ajitena ÷abhi¼haµ pacc÷avekkh×itabbaµ.
“ I am n÷o longer l×iving according t÷o worldly aims and v÷alues.” This should be r÷eflected
upon again and ÷again by one who h÷as g×one forth.

‘Parapa¥÷ibaddhæ me jøv×ikæ’ ti pabb÷ajitena ÷abhi¼haµ pacc÷avekkh×itabbaµ.
“ My ver÷y life is sust×ained through the g×ifts of ÷others.” This should be r÷eflected upon again
and ÷again by one who h÷as g×one forth.

‘Añño me ækappo k÷ar÷a¼øyo’ ti pabb÷ajitena ÷abhi¼haµ pacc÷avekkh×itabbaµ.
“ I sho÷uld strive to ab×andon my former h÷abits.” This should be r÷eflected upon again and
÷again by one who h÷as g×one forth.
‘Kacci n÷u kho me attæ søl÷ato na ÷upavadatø’ ti pabb÷ajitena ÷abhi¼haµ pacc÷avekkh×itabbaµ.
“ Does r÷egret over my c×onduct arise in ÷my mind?” This should be r÷eflected upon again
and ÷again by one who h÷as g×one forth.
‘Kacci n÷u kho maµ ÷anuvicca viññþ sabrahm×acærø søl÷ato na ÷upavadantø’ ti
pabb÷ajitena ÷abhi¼haµ pacc÷avekkh×itabbaµ.
“ Could ÷my spiritual comp×anions find fault with my c÷onduct?” This should be r÷eflected
upon again and ÷again by one who h÷as g×one forth.
‘S÷abbehi me p÷iyehi m÷anæpeh÷i nænæbhævo v÷inæbhævo’ ti pabb÷ajitena abhi¼haµ
pacc÷avekkh×itabbaµ.
“ All that ÷is mine, b÷eloved and pl×easing, will become ÷otherwise, will become s×eparated
from me.” This should be r÷eflected upon again and ÷again by one who h÷as g×one forth.

‘Kammass÷akomhi kamm×adæyædo kamm÷ayoni kamm÷abandhu kammapa¥is×ara¼o,
yaµ kammaµ k÷arissæmi kalyæ¼aµ væ pæp÷akaµ væ, tass÷a dæyædo bh÷avissæmø’ ti
pabb÷ajitena ÷abhi¼haµ pacc÷avekkh×itabbaµ.
“ I am th÷e owner of my k÷amma, heir to my k÷amma, born of my k÷amma, r÷elated to my
k÷amma, ÷abide supp×orted by my k÷amma; whatever kamma I sh÷all do, for good or f÷or ill,
of th°at I will b÷e th×e heir.” This should be r÷eflected upon again and ÷again by one who h÷a
g×one forth.

‘Kathambhþtass÷a me rattind÷ivæ vøt÷ip×atantø’ ti pabb÷ajitena ÷abhi¼haµ pacc÷avekkh×itabbaµ.
“ Th÷e days and nights are r÷elentlessly p×assing; h÷ow well am I sp×end×ing ÷my time?” This
should be r÷eflected upon again and ÷again by one who h÷as g×one forth.

‘Kacci n÷u khohaµ suññ×ægære abhir÷amæmø’ ti pabb÷ajitena ÷abhi¼haµ pacc÷avekkh×itabbaµ.
“ Do I delight in s×olitude or not?” This should be r÷eflected upon again and ÷again by one
who h÷as g×one forth.

‘Atthi n÷u kho me uttari-m÷anussa-dhammæ alamariy÷a-ñæ¼a-dassana-viseso adhig÷ato, sohaµ
pacch×ime kæle s÷abrahmacærøh÷i pu¥¥ho na ma³ku bh÷avissæmø’ ti pabb÷ajitena ÷abhi¼haµ
pacc÷avekkh×itabbaµ.
“ Has ÷my practice borne fruit with freedom or ×insight so that at the ÷end of my life I need
not feel ÷ashamed when questioned ÷by my sp×ir×itual comp÷anions?” This should be r÷eflected
upon again and ÷again by one who h÷as g×one forth.

Ime kho bhikkh×ave d÷as÷a dhammæ pabb÷ajitena ÷abhi¼haµ pacc÷avekkhitabbæ ti.
Bhikkhus, these are the t÷en dhammas to be r÷eflected upon again and ÷again by one who
h÷as g×one forth.

PART THREE: SUTTAS
The Discourse on Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dhamma/
Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta

44

The Discourse on the Characteristic of Not-Self/
Anattalakkha¼a Sutta

52

The Fire Sermon/Ædittapariyæya Sutta

58

The Twenty-Eight Buddhas’ Protection/Æ¥ænæ¥iya Paritta

62

THE DISCOURSE ON SETTING IN MOTION
THE WHEEL OF DHAMMA
(Solo Introduction:)
This is the first teaching of the Tathægata on attaining to unexcelled,
perfect enlightenment.
Here is the perfect turning of the incomparable wheel of Truth,
inestimable wherever it is expounded in the world.
Disclosed here are two extremes, and the Middle Way,
with the Four Noble Truths and the purified knowledge and vision
pointed out by the Lord of Dhamma.
Let us chant together this Sutta proclaiming the supreme,
independent enlightenment that is widely renowned
as “The Turning of the Wheel of the Dhamma.”

Thus have I heard: Once when the Blessed One was staying in the deer sanctuary at
Isipatana, near Benares, he spoke to the group of five bhikkhus:
“These two extremes, bhikkhus, should not be followed by one who has gone forth:
sensual indulgence, which is low, coarse, vulgar, ignoble, and unprofitable; and selftorture, which is painful, ignoble, and unprofitable.
“Bhikkhus, by avoiding these two extremes, the Tathægata has realized the Middle
Way, which gives vision and understanding, which leads to calm, penetration,
enlightenment, to Nibbæna.
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Middle Way realized by the Tathægata, which gives vision
and understanding, which leads to calm, penetration, enlightenment, to Nibbæna?
“It is just this Noble Eightfold Path, namely:
“Right View, Right Intention, Right Speech, Right Action, Right Livelihood, Right Effort,
Right Mindfulness, and Right Concentration.
“Truly, bhikkhus, this Middle Way understood by the Tathægata produces vision,
produces knowledge, and leads to calm, penetration, enlightenment, to Nibbæna.
“This, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of dukkha:
“Birth is dukkha, ageing is dukkha, death is dukkha, grief, lamentation, pain, sorrow
and despair are dukkha, association with the disliked is dukkha, separation from the
liked is dukkha, not to get what one wants is dukkha. In brief, clinging to the five
khandhas is dukkha.

DHAMMACAKKAPPAVATTANA SUTTA
(Solo Introduction:)
Anuttaraµ abhisambodhiµ sambujjhitvæ Tathægato
Pathamaµ yaµ adesesi Dhammacakkaµ anuttaraµ
Sammadeva pavattento loke appativattiyaµ
Yatthækkhætæ ubho antæ patipatti ca majjhimæ
Catþsværiyasaccesu visuddhaµ ñæ¼adassanaµ
Desitaµ dhammaræjena sammæsambodhikittanaµ
Næmena vissutaµ suttaµ Dhammacakkappavattanaµ
Veyyækara¼apæthena sa³gøtantam bha¼æma se.
(Evaµ me sutaµ:)
Ekaµ samayaµ Bhagavæ Bæræ¼asiyaµ viharati Isipatane Migadæye. Tatra kho Bhagavæ
pañcavaggiye bhikkhþ æmantesi:
Dve me, bhikkhave, antæ pabbajitena na sevitabbæ: yo cæyaµ kæmesu
kæmasukhallikænuyogo; høno, gammo, pothujjaniko, anariyo, anatthasañhito; yo cæyaµ
attakilam-athænuyogo; dukkho, anariyo, anatthasañhito.
Ete te, bhikkhave, ubho ante anupagamma majjhimæ pa¥ipadæ Tathægatena
abhisambuddhæ cakkhukara¼ø, ñæ¼akara¼ø, upasamæya, abhiññæya, sambodhæya,
nibbænæya saµvattati.
Katamæ ca sæ, bhikkhave, majjhimæ pa¥ipadæ Tathægatena abhisambuddhæ
cakkhukara¼ø ñæ¼akara¼i, upasamæya, abhiññæya, sambodhæya, nibbænæya saµvattati?
Ayameva ariyo a¥¥ha³giko maggo seyyathødaµ:
Sammæ-di¥¥hi, sammæ-sa³kappo, sammæ-væcæ, sammæ-kammanto, sammæ-æjøvo,
sammæ-væyæmo, sammæ-sati, sammæ-samædhi.
Ayaµ kho sæ, bhikkhave, majjhimæ pa¥ipadæ Tathægatena abhisambuddhæ
cakkhukara¼ø ñæ¼akara¼i, upasamæya, abhiññæya, sambodhæya, nibbænæya saµvattati.
Idaµ kho pana, bhikkhave, dukkhaµ ariyasaccaµ:
Jætipi dukkhæ, jaræpi dukkhæ, mara¼ampi dukkhaµ, soka-parideva-dukkhadomanassupæyæsæpi dukkhæ, appiyehi sampayogo dukkho, piyehi vippayogo dukkho,
yampicchaµ na labhati tampi dukkhaµ, sa³khittena pañcupædænakkhandæ dukkhæ.

“This, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of the cause of dukkha:
“The craving which causes rebirth and is bound up with pleasure and lust, ever
seeking fresh delight, now here, now there; namely, craving for sense pleasure, craving
for existence, and craving for annihilation.
“This, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of the cessation of dukkha:
“The complete cessation, giving up, abandonment of that craving, complete release
from that craving, and complete detachment from it.
“This, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of the way leading to the cessation of dukkha:
“Only this Noble Eightfold Path; namely, Right View, Right Intention, Right Speech,
Right Action, Right Livelihood, Right Effort, Right Mindfulness, and Right Concentration.
“With the thought, ‘This is the Noble Truth of dukkha,’ there arose in me, bhikkhus,
vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
“With the thought, ‘This is the Noble Truth of dukkha, and this dukkha has to be
understood,’ there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light,
concerning things unknown before.
“With the thought, ‘This is the Noble Truth of dukkha, and this dukkha has been
understood,’ there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light,
concerning things unknown before.
“With the thought, ‘This is the Noble Truth of the cause of dukkha,’ there arose in me,
bhikkhus, vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown
before.
“With the thought, ‘This is the Noble Truth of the cause of dukkha, and this cause of
dukkha has to be abandoned,’ there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge, insight,
wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
“With the thought, ‘This is the Noble Truth of the cause of dukkha, and this cause of
dukkha has been abandoned,’ there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge, insight,
wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
“With the thought, ‘This is the Noble Truth of the cessation of dukkha,’ there arose in
me vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
“With the thought, ‘This is the Noble Truth of the cessation of dukkha, and this
cessation of dukkha has to be realized,’ there arose in me vision, knowledge, insight,
wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
“With the thought, ‘This is the Noble Truth of the cessation of dukkha, and this
cessation of dukkha has been realized,’ there arose in me vision, knowledge, insight,
wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.

Idaµ kho pana, bhikkhave, dukkhasamudayo ariyasaccaµ:
Yæyaµ ta¼hæ ponobbhavikæ nandirægasahagatæ tatra tatræbhinandinø seyyathødaµ:
kæmata¼hæ, bhavata¼hæ, vibhavata¼hæ.
Idaµ kho pana, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodho ariyasaccaµ:
Yo tassæ yeva ta¼hæya asesaviræganirodho, cægo, pa¥inissaggo, mutti, anælayo.
Idaµ kho pana, bhikkhave, dukkhanirodhagæminø pa¥ipadæ ariyasaccaµ:
Ayameva ariyo a¥¥ha³giko maggo seyyathødam: Sammæ-di¥¥hi, sammæ-sa³kappo,
sammæ-væcæ, sammæ-kammanto, sammæ-æjøvo, sammæ-væyæmo, sammæ-sati,
sammæ-samædhi.
(Idaµ dukkhaµ) ariyasaccanti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu
cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ udapædi, vijjæ udapædi, æloko udapædi.
Taµ kho panidaµ dukkhaµ ariyasaccaµ pariññeyyanti me, bhikkhave, pubbe
ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ udapædi, vijjæ
udapædi, æloko udapædi.
Taµ kho panidaµ dukkhaµ ariyasaccaµ pariññætanti me, bhikkhave, pubbe
ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ udapædi, vijjæ
udapædi, æloko udapædi.
Idaµ dukkhasamudayo ariyasaccanti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu
cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ udapædi, vijjæ udapædi, æloko udapædi.
Taµ kho panidaµ dukkhasamudayo, ariyasaccaµ pahætabbanti me, bhikkhave,
pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ udapædi,
vijjæ udapædi, æloko udapædi.
Taµ kho panidaµ dukkhasamudayo, ariyasaccaµ pahønanti me, bhikkhave, pubbe
ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ udapædi, vijjæ
udapædi, æloko udapædi.
Idaµ dukkhanirodho ariyasaccanti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu
cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ udapædi, vijjæ udapædi, æloko udapædi.
Taµ kho panidaµ dukkhanirodho ariyasaccaµ sacchikætabbanti me, bhikkhave,
pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ udapædi,
vijjæ udapædi, æloko udapædi.
Taµ kho panidaµ dukkhanirodho ariyasaccaµ sacchikatanti me, bhikkhave, pubbe
ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ udapædi, vijjæ
udapædi, æloko udapædi.

“With the thought, ‘This is the Noble Truth of the way leading to the cessation of
dukkha,’ there arose in me vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things
unknown before.
“With the thought, ‘This Noble Truth of the way leading to the cessation of dukkha
has to be developed,’ there arose in me vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light,
concerning things unknown before.
“With the thought, ‘This Noble Truth of the way leading to the cessation of dukkha
has been developed,’ there arose in me vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light,
concerning things unknown before.
“So long, bhikkhus, as my knowledge and vision of reality regarding these Four Noble
Truths, in their three phases and twelve aspects, was not fully clear to me, I did not
declare to the world of spirits, demons, and gods, with its seekers and sages, celestial
and human beings, the realization of incomparable, perfect enlightenment.
“But when, bhikkhus, my knowledge and vision of reality regarding these Four Noble
Truths, in their three phases and twelve aspects, was fully clear to me, I declared to the
world of spirits, demons, and gods, with its seekers and sages, celestial and human
beings, that I understood incomparable, perfect enlightenment.
“Knowledge and vision arose: ‘Unshakeable is my deliverance; this is the last birth,
there will be no more renewal of being.’”
Thus spoke the Blessed One. Glad at heart, the group of five bhikkhus approved of
the words of the Blessed One.
As this exposition was proceeding, the spotless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma
appeared to the Venerable Ko¼ðañña and he knew: “Everything that has the nature to
arise has the nature to cease.”
When the Blessed One had set in motion the Wheel of Dhamma, the Earthbound devas
proclaimed with one voice, “The incomparable Wheel of Dhamma has been set in
motion by the Blessed One in the deer sanctuary at Isipatana, near Benares, and no
seeker, brahmin, celestial being, demon, god, or any other being in the world can stop
it.”
Having heard what the Earthbound devas said, the devas of the Four Great Kings
proclaimed with one voice. . . .
Having heard what the devas of the Four Great Kings said, the devas of the Thirtythree proclaimed with one voice. . . .
Having heard what the devas of the Thirty-three said, the Yæma devas proclaimed
with one voice. . . .
Having heard what the Yæma devas said, the Devas of Delight proclaimed with one
voice. . . .
Having heard what the Devas of Delight said, the Devas Who Delight in Creating,
proclaimed with one voice. . . .

Idaµ dukkhanirodhagæminø patipadæ ariyasaccanti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu
dhammesu cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ udapædi, vijjæ udapædi, æloko
udapædi.
Taµ kho panidaµ dukkhanirodhagæminø patipadæ ariyasaccaµ bhævetabbanti me,
bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ
udapædi, vijjæ udapædi, æloko udapædi.
Taµ kho panidaµ dukkhanirodhagæminø patipadæ ariyasaccaµ bhævitanti me,
bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu cakkhuµ udapædi, ñæ¼aµ udapædi, paññæ
udapædi, vijjæ udapædi, æloko udapædi.
(Yæva køvañca me), bhikkhave, imesu catþsu ariyasaccesu evantipariva¥¥aµ
dvædasækæraµ yathæbhþtaµ ñæ¼adassanaµ na suvisuddhaµ ahosi, neva tævæhaµ,
bhikkhave, sadevake loke samærake sabrahmake sassama¼abræhma¼iyæ pajæya
sadevamanussæya anuttaraµ sammæsambodhiµ abhisambuddho paccaññæsiµ.
Yato ca kho me, bhikkhave, imesu catþsu ariyasaccesu evantipariva¥¥aµ
dvædasækæraµ yathæbhþtaµ ñæ¼adassanaµ suvisuddham ahosi, athæham, bhikkhave,
sadevake loke samærake sabrahmake sassama¼abræhma¼iyæ pajæya sadevamanussæya
anuttaraµ sammæsambodhiµ abhisambuddho paccaññæsiµ.
Ñæ¼añca pana me dassanaµ udapædi, “Akuppæ me vimutti ayamantimæ jæti, natthidæni
punabbhavo” ti.
Idam avoca Bhagavæ. Attamanæ pañcavaggiyæ bhikkhþ Bhægavato bhæsitaµ
abhinanduµ.
Imasmiñca pana veyyækara¼asmiµ bhaññamæne æyasmato Ko¼ðaññassa virajaµ
vøtamalaµ Dhammacakkhuµ udapædi: “Ya³kinci samudayadhammaµ sabbantaµ
nirodhadhamman” ti.
(Pavattite ca Bhagavatæ) Dhammacakke bhummæ devæ saddamanussævesuµ: “Etaµ
Bhagavatæ Bæræ¼asiyaµ Isipatane Migadæye anuttaraµ Dhammacakkaµ pavattitaµ
appa¥ivattiyaµ sama¼ena væ bræhma¼ena væ devena væ mærena væ brahmunæ væ kenaci
væ lokasmin” ti.
Bhummænaµ devænaµ saddaµ sutvæ, Cætummahæræjikæ devæ
saddamanussævesuµ. . . .
Cætummahæræjikænaµ devænaµ saddaµ sutvæ, Tævatiµsæ devæ
saddamanussævesuµ. . . .
Tævatiµsænaµ devænaµ saddaµ sutvæ, Yæmæ devæ saddamanussævesuµ. . . .
Yæmænaµ devænaµ saddaµ sutvæ, Tusitæ devæ saddamanussævesuµ. . . .
Tusitænaµ devænaµ saddaµ sutvæ, Nimmænaratø devæ saddamanussævesuµ. . . .

Having heard what the Devas Who Delight in Creating said, the Devas Who Delight in
the Creations of Others proclaimed with one voice. . . .
Having heard what the Devas Who Delight in the Creations of Others said, the
Brahma gods proclaimed in one voice, “The incomparable Wheel of Dhamma has been
set in motion by the Blessed One in the deer sanctuary at Isipatana, near Benares, and
no seeker, brahmin, celestial being, demon, god, or any other being in the world can
stop it.”
Thus in a moment, an instant, a flash, word of the Setting in Motion of the Wheel of
Dhamma went forth up to the Brahma world, and the ten-thousandfold universal system
trembled and quaked and shook, and a boundless, sublime radiance surpassing the
power of devas appeared on earth.
Then the Blessed One made the utterance, “Truly, Ko¼ðañña has understood,
Ko¼ðañña has understood!”
Thus it was that the Venerable Ko¼ðañña got the name Aññæko¼ðañña: “Ko¼ðañña
Who Understands.”
Thus Ends the Discourse on Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dhamma.

Nimmænaratønaµ devænaµ saddaµ sutvæ, Paranimmitavasavattø devæ
saddamanussævesuµ. . . .
Paranimmitavasavattønaµ devænaµ saddaµ sutvæ, Brahmakæyikæ devæ
saddamanussævesuµ: “Etaµ Bhagavatæ Bæræ¼asiyaµ Isipatane Migadæye anuttaraµ
Dhammacakkaµ pavattitaµ appa¥ivattiyaµ sama¼ena væ bræhma¼ena væ devena væ
mærena væ brahmunæ væ kenaci væ lokasmin” ti.
Itiha tena kha¼ena, tena muhuttena, yæva brahmalokæ saddo abbhuggacchi. Ayañca
dasasahassø lokadhætu sa³kampi sampakampi sampavedhi, appamæ¼o ca o¹æro obhæso
loke pæturahosi atikkammeva devænaµ devænubhævaµ.
Atha kho Bhagavæ udænaµ udænesi: “Aññæsi vata bho Ko¼ðañño, aññæsi vata bho
Ko¼ðañño” ti.
Itihidaµ æyasmato Ko¼ðaññassa Aññæko¼ðañño tveva næmaµ ahosø ti.
Dhammacakkappavattana Suttaµ ni¥¥hitaµ

THE DISCOURSE ON THE CHARACTERISTIC OF NOT-SELF
(Solo Introduction:)
All beings should take pains to understand the characteristic of anattæ,
not-self, which provides matchless deliverance from self-belief and
self-perception,
As taught by the supreme Buddha. This teaching is given so that those
who meditate on experienceable realities may arrive at perfect
comprehension;
It is for the development of perfect understanding of these phenomena,
And for the investigation of all defiled mind-moments.
The consequence of this practice is total deliverance, so, desirous of
bringing this teaching forth with its great benefit, let us now recite this Sutta.

Thus have I heard: At one time the Blessed One was dwelling at Benares in the deer
park. There he addressed the group of five bhikkhus:
“Form, bhikkhus, is not-self. If, bhikkhus, form were self, then form would not lead to
affliction, and one might be able to say in regard to form, ‘Let my form be thus, let my
form not be thus.’ But since, bhikkhus, form is not-self, form therefore leads to
affliction, and one is not able to say in regard to form, ‘Let my form be thus, let my form
not be thus.’
“Feeling is not-self. If, bhikkhus, feeling were self, feeling would not lead to affliction,
and one might be able to say in regard to feeling, ‘Let my feeling be thus, let my feeling
not be thus.’ But since, bhikkhus, feeling is not-self, feeling therefore leads to affliction,
and one is not able to say in regard to feeling, ‘Let my feeling be thus, let my feeling not
be thus.’
“Perception is not-self. If, bhikkhus, perception were self, perception would not lead
to affliction, and one might be able to say in regard to perception, ‘Let my perception be
thus, let my perception not be thus.’ But since, bhikkhus, perception is not-self,
perception therefore leads to affliction, and one is not able to say in regard to
perception, ‘Let my perception be thus, let my perception not be thus.’
“Mental formations are not-self. If, bhikkhus, mental formations were self, mental
formations would not lead to affliction, and one might be able to say in regard to mental
formations, ‘Let my mental formations be thus, let my mental formations not be thus.’
But since, bhikkhus, mental formations are not-self, mental formations therefore lead to
affliction, and one is not able to say in regard to mental formations, ‘Let my mental
formations be thus, let my mental formations not be thus.’

ANATTALAKKHA¤A SUTTA
(Solo Introduction:)
Yantaµ sattehi dukkhena ñeyyaµ anattalakkha¼aµ
Attavædattasaññæ¼aµ sammadeva vimocanaµ
Sambuddho taµ pakæsesi di¥¥hasaccæna yoginaµ
Uttariµ pa¥ivedhæya bhævetuµ ñæ¼amuttamaµ
Yantesaµ di¥¥hadhammænam ñæ¼enupaparikkhataµ
Sabbæsavehi cittæni vimucciµsu asesato
Tathæ ñæ¼ænussærena sæsanaµ kætumicchataµ
Sædhþnaµ atthasiddhatthaµ taµ suttantaµ bha¼æma se

(Evaµ me sutaµ:)
Ekaµ samayaµ Bhagavæ Bæræ¼asiyaµ viharati Isipatane Migadæye. Tatra kho Bhagavæ
pañcavaggiye bhikkhþ æmantesi:
Rþpaµ bhikkhave anattæ, rþpañca hidaµ bhikkhave attæ abhavissa, nayidaµ rþpaµ
æbædhæya saµvatteyya, labbhetha ca rþpe, “Evaµ me rþpaµ hotu, evaµ me rþpaµ mæ
ahosø” ti. Yasmæ ca kho bhikkhave rþpaµ anattæ, tasmæ rþpaµ æbædhæya saµvattati, na
ca labbhati rþpe, “Evaµ me rþpaµ hotu, evaµ me rþpaµ mæ ahosø” ti.
Vedanæ anattæ, vedanæ ca hidaµ bhikkhave attæ abhavissa, nayidaµ vedanæ æbædhæya
saµvatteyya, labbhetha ca vedanæya, “Evaµ me vedanæ hotu, evaµ me vedanæ mæ
ahosø” ti. Yasmæ ca kho bhikkhave vedanæ anattæ, tasmæ vedanæ æbædhæya saµvattati,
na ca labbhati vedanæya, “Evaµ me vedanæ hotu, evaµ me vedanæ mæ ahosø” ti.
Saññæ anattæ, saññæ ca hidaµ bhikkhave attæ abhavissa, nayidaµ saññæ æbædhæya
saµvatteyya, labbhetha ca saññæya, “Evaµ me saññæ hotu, evaµ me saññæ mæ ahosø” ti.
Yasmæ ca kho bhikkhave saññæ anattæ, tasmæ saññæ æbædhæya saµvattati, na ca labbhati
saññæya, “Evaµ me saññæ hotu, evaµ me saññæ mæ ahosø” ti.
Sa³khæræ anattæ, sa³khæræ ca hidaµ bhikkhave attæ abhavissaµsu, nayidaµ sa³khæræ
æbædhæya saµvatteyyuµ, labbhetha ca sa³khæresu, “Evaµ me sa³khæræ hontu, evaµ
me sa³khæræ mæ ahesun” ti. Yasmæ ca kho bhikkhave sa³khæræ anattæ, tasmæ sa³khæræ
æbædhæya saµvattanti, na ca labbhati sa³khæresu “Evaµ me sa³khæræ hontu, evaµ me
sa³khæræ mæ ahesun” ti.

“Consciousness is not-self. If, bhikkhus, consciousness were self, consciousness
would not lead to affliction, and one might be able to say in regard to consciousness,
‘Let my consciousness be thus, let my consciousness not be thus.’ But since, bhikkhus,
consciousness is not-self, consciousness therefore leads to affliction, and one is not able
to say in regard to consciousness, ‘Let my consciousness be thus, let my consciousness
not be thus.’
“What do you think about this, bhikkhus? Is form permanent or impermanent?”
“Impermanent, Lord.”
“But is that which is impermanent painful or pleasurable?”
“Painful, Lord.”
“But is it fit to consider that which is impermanent, painful, of a nature to change, as
‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”
“It is not, Lord.”
“What do you think about this, bhikkhus? Is feeling permanent or impermanent?”
“Impermanent, Lord.”
“But is that which is impermanent painful or pleasurable?”
“Painful, Lord.”
“But is it fit to consider that which is impermanent, painful, of a nature to change, as
‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”
“It is not, Lord.”
“What do you think about this, bhikkhus? Is perception permanent or impermanent?”
“Impermanent, Lord.”
“But is that which is impermanent painful or pleasurable?”
“Painful, Lord.”
“But is it fit to consider that which is impermanent, painful, of a nature to change, as
‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”
“It is not, Lord.”
“What do you think about this, bhikkhus? Are mental formations permanent or
impermanent?”
“Impermanent, Lord.”
“But is that which is impermanent painful or pleasurable?”
“Painful, Lord.”
“But is it fit to consider that which is impermanent, painful, of a nature to change, as
‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”
“It is not, Lord.”
“What do you think about this, bhikkhus? Is consciousness permanent or
impermanent?”
“Impermanent, Lord.”
“But is that which is impermanent painful or pleasurable?”
“Painful, Lord.”

Viññæ¼aµ anattæ, viññæ¼añca hidaµ bhikkhave attæ abhavissa, nayidaµ viññæ¼am
æbædhæya saµvatteyya, labbhetha ca viññæ¼e “Evaµ me viññæ¼aµ hotu, evaµ me
viññæ¼aµ mæ ahosø” ti. Yasmæ ca kho bhikkhave viññæ¼aµ anattæ, tasmæ viññæ¼aµ
æbædhæya saµvattati, na ca labbhati viññæ¼e, “Evaµ me viññæ¼aµ hotu, evaµ me
viññæ¼aµ mæ ahosø” ti.
(Taµ kiµ maññatha bhikkhave), rþpam niccaµ væ aniccaµ væti?
Aniccaµ bhante.
Yam panæniccaµ, dukkhaµ væ taµ sukhaµ væti?
Dukkhaµ bhante.
Yam panæniccaµ dukkhaµ viparinæma-dhammaµ, kallaµ nu taµ samanupassituµ
“Etaµ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attæ” ti?
No hetaµ bhante.
Taµ kiµ maññatha bhikkhave, vedanæ niccæ væ aniccæ væti?
Aniccæ bhante.
Yam panæniccaµ, dukkhaµ væ taµ sukhaµ væti?
Dukkhaµ bhante.
Yam panæniccaµ dukkhaµ viparinæma-dhammaµ, kallaµ nu taµ samanupassituµ
“Etaµ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attæ” ti?
No hetaµ bhante.
Taµ kiµ maññatha bhikkhave, saññæ niccæ væ aniccæ væti?
Aniccæ bhante.
Yam panæniccaµ, dukkhaµ væ taµ sukhaµ væti?
Dukkhaµ bhante.
Yam panæniccaµ dukkhaµ viparinæma-dhammaµ, kallaµ nu taµ samanupassituµ
“Etaµ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attæ” ti?
No hetaµ bhante.
Taµ kiµ maññatha bhikkhave, sa³khæræ niccæ væ aniccæ væti?
Aniccæ bhante.
Yam panæniccaµ, dukkhaµ væ taµ sukhaµ væti?
Dukkhaµ bhante.
Yam panæniccaµ dukkhaµ viparinæma-dhammaµ, kallaµ nu taµ samanupassituµ
“Etaµ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attæ” ti?
No hetaµ bhante.
Taµ kiµ maññatha bhikkhave,viññæ¼aµ niccaµ væ aniccaµ væti?
Aniccaµ bhante.
Yam panæniccaµ, dukkhaµ væ taµ sukhaµ væti?
Dukkhaµ bhante.

“But is it fit to consider that which is impermanent, painful, of a nature to change, as
‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”
“It is not, Lord.”
“Wherefore, bhikkhus, whatever form there is, past, future, present, internal or external,
gross or subtle, inferior or superior, whether it is far or near, all form should, by means
of right wisdom, be seen as it really is, thus: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not
my self.’
“Whatever feeling there is, past, future, present, internal or external, gross or subtle,
inferior or superior, whether it is far or near, all feeling should, by means of right
wisdom, be seen as it really is, thus: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’
“Whatever perception there is, past, future, present, internal or external, gross or
subtle, inferior or superior, whether it is far or near, all feeling should, by means of right
wisdom, be seen as it really is, thus: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’
“Whatever mental formations there are, past, future, present, internal or external,
gross or subtle, inferior or superior, whether they are far or near, all mental formations
should, by means of right wisdom, be seen as they really are, thus: ‘This is not mine, I
am not this, this is not my self.’
“Whatever consciousness there is, past, future, present, internal or external, gross or
subtle, inferior or superior, whether far or near, all consciousness should, by means of
right wisdom, be seen as it really is, thus: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my
self.’

“Seeing in this way, bhikkhus, the wise noble disciple becomes disenchanted with form,
becomes disenchanted with feeling, becomes disenchanted with perception, becomes
disenchanted with mental formations, becomes disenchanted with consciousness.
Becoming disenchanted, their passions fade away; with the fading of passion the heart
is liberated; with liberation there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated,’ and they know:
‘Destroyed is birth, the Holy Life has been lived out, done is what had to be done, there
is no more coming into any state of being.’”
Thus spoke the Blessed One. Delighted, the group of five bhikkhus rejoiced in what the
Lord had said. Moreover, while this discourse was being delivered, the minds of the five
bhikkhus were freed from the defilements, through clinging no more.
Thus Ends the Discourse on the Characteristic of Not-Self.

Yam panæniccaµ dukkhaµ viparinæma-dhammaµ, kallaµ nu taµ samanupassituµ
“Etaµ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attæ” ti?
No hetaµ bhante.
(Tasmæ tiha bhikkhave) ya³kiñci rþpaµ atøtænægata-paccuppannaµ ajjhattaµ væ
bahiddhæ væ o¹ærikaµ væ sukhumaµ væ hønaµ væ pa¼øtaµ væ yandþre santike væ,
sabbaµ rþpaµ “Netaµ mama, nesohamasmi, na me so attæ” ti evametaµ yathæbhþtaµ
sammappaññæya da¥¥habbaµ.
Yæ kæci vedanæ atøtænægata-paccuppannæ ajjhattæ væ bahiddhæ væ o¹ærikæ væ sukhumæ
væ hønæ væ pa¼øtæ væ yæ dþre santike væ, sabbæ vedanæ “Netaµ mama, nesohamasmi, na
me so attæ” ti evametaµ yathæbhþtaµ sammappaññæya da¥¥habbaµ.
Yæ kæci saññæ atøtænægata-paccuppannæ ajjhattæ væ bahiddhæ væ o¹ærikæ væ sukhumæ væ
hønæ væ pa¼øtæ væ yæ dþre santike væ, sabbæ saññæ “Netaµ mama, nesohamasmi, na me
so attæ” ti evametaµ yathæbhþtaµ sammappaññæya da¥¥habbaµ.
Ye keci sa³khæræ atøtænægata-paccuppannæ ajjhattæ væ bahiddhæ væ o¹ærikæ væ
sukhumæ væ hønæ væ pa¼øtæ væ ye dþre santike væ, sabbe sa³khæræ “Netaµ mama,
nesohamasmi, na me so attæ” ti evametaµ yathæbhþtaµ sammappaññæya da¥¥habbaµ.
Ya³kiñci viññæ¼aµ atøtænægata-paccuppannaµ ajjhattaµ væ bahiddhæ væ o¹ærikaµ væ
sukhumaµ væ hønaµ væ pa¼øtaµ væ yandþre santike væ, sabbaµ viññæ¼aµ “Netaµ
mama, nesohamasmi, na me so attæ” ti evametaµ yathæbhþtaµ sammappaññæya
da¥¥habbaµ.
(Evaµ passaµ) bhikkhave sutvæ ariyasævako rþpasmim pi nibbindati, vedanæya pi
nibbindati, saññæya pi nibbindati, sa³khæresu pi nibbindati, viññæ¼asmim pi nibbindati,
nibbindaµ virajjati, virægæ vimuccati, vimuttasmiµ “Vimuttam” iti ñæ¼aµ hoti, “Khø¼æ
jæti, vusitaµ brahmacariyaµ, kataµ kara¼øyaµ, næparaµ itthattæyæ” ti pajænætø ti.
Idamavoca Bhagavæ. Attamanæ pañcavaggiyæ bhikkhþ Bhagavato bhæsitaµ
abhinanduµ. Imasmiñca pana veyyækara¼asmiµ bhaññamæne pañcavaggiyænaµ
bhikkhþnaµ anupædæya æsavehi cittæni vimucciµsþti.
Anattalakkha¼a Suttaµ ni¥¥hitaµ

THE FIRE SERMON
(Solo Introduction:)
With his skill in training the trainable,
The All-transcendent Buddha, lucid speaker, teacher of the highest knowledge,
He who expounds to the people the Dhamma and Vinaya that is fitting and
worthy,
Teaching with this wonderful parable about fire, meditators of the highest skill,
He has liberated those who listen with the liberation that is utterly complete,
Through true investigation, with wisdom and attention.
Let us now recite this Sutta which describes the characteristics of dukkha.

Thus have I heard: At one time the Blessed One was staying near Gayæ at Gayæ Head
together with a thousand bhikkhus. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus
“Bhikkhus, everything is burning. And what, bhikkhus, is everything that is burning?
“The eye, bhikkhus, is burning, forms are burning, eye consciousness is burning, eye
contact is burning, the feeling that arises from eye contact, whether it is pleasant,
painful, or neutral, that too is burning. With what is it burning? I declare that it is
burning with the fires of passion, hatred, and delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing,
and death, with sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair.
“The ear is burning, sounds are burning, ear consciousness is burning, ear contact is
burning, the feeling that arises from ear contact, whether it is pleasant, painful, or
neutral, that too is burning. With what is it burning? I declare that it is burning with the
fires of passion, hatred, and delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing, and death, with
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair.
“The nose is burning, odors are burning, nose consciousness is burning, nose contact
is burning, the feeling that arises from nose contact, whether it is pleasant, painful, or
neutral, that too is burning. With what is it burning? I declare that it is burning with the
fires of passion, hatred, and delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing, and death, with
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair.
“The tongue is burning, tastes are burning, tongue consciousness is burning, tongue
contact is burning, the feeling that arises from tongue contact, whether it is pleasant,
painful, or neutral, that too is burning. With what is it burning? I declare that it is
burning with the fires of passion, hatred, and delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing,
and death, with sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair.
“The body is burning, tangible objects are burning, body consciousness is burning,
body contact is burning, the feeling that arises from body contact, whether it is pleasant,
painful, or neutral, that too is burning. With what is it burning? I declare that it is
burning with the fires of passion, hatred, and delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing,
and death, with sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair.

ÆDITTAPARIYÆYA SUTTA
(Solo Introduction:)
Veneyyadamanopæye sabbaso pæramiµ gato
Amoghavacano Buddho abhiññæyænusæsako
Ci¼¼ænurþpato cæpi dhammena vinayaµ pajaµ
Ci¼¼æggipæricariyænaµ sambojjhærahayoginaµ
Yamædittapariyæyaµ desayanto manoharaµ
Te sotæro vimocesi asekkhæya vimuttiyæ
Tathevopaparikkhæya viññþ¼aµ sotumicchataµ
Dukkhatælakkha¼opæyaµ taµ suttantaµ bha¼æma se.

(Evaµ me sutaµ:)
Ekaµ samayaµ Bhagavæ Gayæyaµ viharati Gayæsøse saddhiµ bhikkhusahassena.
Tatra kho Bhagavæ bhikkhþ æmantesi:
Sabbaµ bhikkhave ædittaµ. Kiñca bhikkhave sabbaµ ædittaµ?
Cakkhuµ bhikkhave ædittaµ, rþpæ ædittæ, cakkhuviññæ¼aµ ædittaµ,
cakkhusamphasso æditto, yampidaµ cakkhusamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ
sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ adukkhamasukhaµ væ tam pi ædittaµ. Kena ædittaµ? Ædittaµ
rægagginæ dosagginæ mohagginæ, ædittaµ jætiyæ jaræmara¼ena sokehi paridevehi
dukkhehi domanassehi upæyæsehi ædittanti vadæmi.
Sotaµ ædittaµ, saddæ ædittæ, sotaviññæ¼aµ ædittaµ, sotasamphasso æditto, yampidaµ
sotasamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ adukkhamasukhaµ
væ tam pi ædittaµ. Kena ædittaµ? Ædittaµ rægagginæ dosagginæ mohagginæ, ædittaµ jætiyæ
jaræmara¼ena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upæyæsehi ædittanti vadæmi.
Ghænaµ ædittaµ, gandhæ ædittæ, ghænaviññæ¼aµ ædittaµ, ghænasamphasso æditto,
yampidaµ ghænasamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ
adukkhamasukhaµ væ tam pi ædittaµ. Kena ædittaµ? Ædittaµ rægagginæ dosagginæ
mohagginæ, ædittaµ jætiyæ jaræmara¼ena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi
upæyæsehi ædittanti vadæmi.
Jivhæ ædittæ, rasæ ædittæ, jivhæviññæ¼am ædittaµ, jivhæsamphasso æditto, yampidaµ
jivhæsamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ adukkhamasukhaµ væ tam pi ædittaµ. Kena ædittaµ? Ædittaµ rægagginæ dosagginæ mohagginæ,
ædittaµ jætiyæ jaræmara¼ena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upæyæsehi
ædittanti vadæmi.
Kæyo æditto, pho¥¥habbæ ædittæ, kæyaviññæ¼aµ ædittaµ, kæyasamphasso æditto,
yampidaµ kæyasamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ
adukkhamasukhaµ væ tam pi ædittaµ. Kena ædittaµ? Ædittaµ rægagginæ dosagginæ
mohagginæ, ædittaµ jætiyæ jaræmara¼ena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi
upæyæsehi ædittanti vadæmi.

“The mind is burning, mental states are burning, mind consciousness is burning, mind
contact is burning, the feeling that arises through mind contact, whether it is pleasant,
painful, or neutral, that too is burning. With what is it burning? I declare that it is
burning with the fires of passion, hatred, and delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing,
and death, with sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair.

“Seeing thus, bhikkhus, the wise noble disciple becomes disenchanted with the eye and
disenchanted with forms, disenchanted with eye consciousness, disenchanted with eye
contact, and the feeling that arises from eye contact—whether it is pleasant, painful, or
neutral—that too they become disenchanted with.
“They become disenchanted with the ear, disenchanted with sounds, disenchanted
with ear consciousness, disenchanted with ear contact, and the feeling that arises from
ear contact—whether it is pleasant, painful, or neutral—that too they become
disenchanted with.
“They become disenchanted with the nose, disenchanted with odors, disenchanted
with nose consciousness, disenchanted with nose contact, and the feeling that arises
from nose contact—whether it is pleasant, painful, or neutral—that too they become
disenchanted with.
“They become disenchanted with the tongue, disenchanted with tastes, disenchanted
with tongue consciousness, disenchanted with tongue contact, and the feeling that
arises from tongue contact—whether it is pleasant, painful, or neutral—that too they
become disenchanted with.
“They become disenchanted with the body, disenchanted with tangible objects,
disenchanted with body consciousness, disenchanted with body contact, and the feeling
that arises from body contact—whether it is pleasant, painful, or neutral—that too they
become disenchanted with.
“They become disenchanted with the mind, disenchanted with mental states,
disenchanted with mind consciousness, disenchanted with mind contact, and the feeling
that arises from mind contact—whether it is pleasant, painful, or neutral—that too they
become disenchanted with.
“Becoming disenchanted, their passions fade away; with the fading of passion the heart
is liberated; with liberation there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated,’ and they know:
‘Destroyed is birth, the Holy Life has been lived out, done is what had to be done, there
is no more coming into any state of being.’”
Thus spoke the Blessed One; delighted, the bhikkhus rejoiced in what the Lord had
said. Moreover, while this discourse was being uttered, the minds of those thousand
bhikkhus were freed from the defilements, without any further attachment.
Thus Ends the Fire Sermon.

Mano æditto, dhammæ ædittæ, manoviññæ¼aµ ædittaµ, manosamphasso æditto,
yampidaµ manosamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ
adukkhamasukhaµ væ tam pi ædittaµ. Kena ædittaµ? Ædittaµ rægagginæ dosagginæ
mohagginæ, ædittaµ jætiyæ jaræmara¼ena sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi
upæyæsehi ædittanti vadæmi.
(Evaµ passaµ) bhikkhave sutvæ ariyasævako cakkhusmiµ pi nibbindati, rþpesu pi
nibbindati, cakkhuviññæ¼e pi nibbindati, cakkhusamphassepi nibbindati, yampidaµ
cakkhusamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ adukkhamasukhaµ væ tasmiµ pi nibbindati.
Sotasmiµ pi nibbindati, saddesu pi nibbindati, sotaviññæ¼e pi nibbindati,
sotasamphassepi nibbindati, yampidaµ sotasamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ
sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ adukkhamasukhaµ væ tasmiµ pi nibbindati.
Ghænasmiµ pi nibbindati, gandhesu pi nibbindati, ghænaviññæ¼e pi nibbindati,
ghænasamphassepi nibbindati, yampidaµ ghænasamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ
sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ adukkhamasukhaµ væ tasmiµ pi nibbindati.
Jivhæya pi nibbindati, rasesu pi nibbindati, jivhæviññæ¼e pi nibbindati,
jivhæsamphassepi nibbindati, yampidaµ jivhæsamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ
sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ adukkhamasukhaµ væ tasmiµ pi nibbindati.
Kæyasmiµ pi nibbindati, pho¥¥habbesu pi nibbindati, kæyaviññæ¼e pi nibbindati,
kæyasamphassepi nibbindati, yampidaµ kæyasamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ
sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ adukkhamasukhaµ væ tasmiµ pi nibbindati.
Manasmiµ pi nibbindati, dhammesu pi nibbindati, manoviññæ¼e pi nibbindati,
manosamphasse pi nibbindati, yampidaµ manosamphassapaccayæ uppajjati vedayitaµ
sukhaµ væ dukkhaµ væ adukkhamasukhaµ væ tasmiµ pi nibbindati.

Nibbindaµ virajjati, virægæ vimuccati, vimuttasmiµ ‘Vimuttam’ iti ñæ¼aµ hoti, ‘Khø¼æ jæti,
vusitaµ brahmacariyaµ, kataµ kara¼øyaµ, næparaµ itthattæyæ’ ti pajænætøti.

Idamavoca Bhagavæ. Attamanæ te bhikkhþ Bhagavato bhæsitaµ abhinanduµ. Imasmiñca
pana veyyækara¼asmiµ bhaññamæne tassa bhikkhusahassassa anupædæya æsavehi
cittæni vimucciµsþti.
Ædittapariyæya Suttaµ ni¥¥hitaµ

THE TWENTY-EIGHT BUDDHAS’ PROTECTION
(Solo Introduction:)
We will now recite the discourse given by the Great Hero (the Buddha)
As a protection for virtue-loving human beings
Against harm from all evil-doing, malevolent nonhumans
Who are displeased with the Buddha’s Teachings.
Homage to all Buddhas, the mighty who have arisen:
Ta¼ha³kara, the great hero, Medha³kara, the renowned,
Sara¼a³kara, who guarded the world, Døpa³kara, the light-bearer,
Ko¼ðañña, liberator of people, Ma³gala, great leader of people,
Sumana, kindly and wise, Revata, increaser of joy,
Sobhita, perfected in virtues, Anomadassø, greatest of beings,
Paduma, illuminer of the world, Naræda, true charioteer,
Padumuttara, most excellent of beings, Sumedha, the unequalled one,
Sujæta, summit of the world, Piyadassø, great leader of men,
Atthadassø, the compassionate, Dhammadassø, destroyer of darkness,
Siddhattha, unequalled in the world, and Tissa, speaker of Truth,
Phussa, bestower of blessings, Vipassø, the incomparable,
Sikhø, the bliss-bestowing teacher, Vessabhþ, giver of happiness,
Kakusandha, the caravan leader, Ko¼ægamana, abandoner of ills,
Kassapa, perfect in glory, Gotama, chief of the Sakyans.
These and all self-enlightened Buddhas are also peerless ones,
All the Buddhas together, all of mighty power,
All endowed with the Ten Powers, attained to highest knowledge,
All of these are accorded the supreme place of leadership.
They roar the lion’s roar with confidence among their followers,
They observe with the divine eye, unhindered, all the world.
The leaders endowed with the eighteen kinds of Buddha-Dhamma,
The thirty-two major and eighty minor marks of a great being,
Shining with fathom-wide haloes, all these elephant-like sages,
All these omniscient Buddhas, conquerors free of corruption,
Of mighty brilliance, mighty power, of mighty wisdom, mighty strength,
Of mighty compassion and wisdom, bearing bliss to all,
Islands, guardians and supports, shelters and caves for all beings,
Resorts, kinsmen and comforters, benevolent givers of refuge,
These are all the final resting place for the world with its deities.

Æ¿ÆNÆ¿IYA PARITTA
(Solo Introduction:)
Appasannehi næthassa sæsane sædhusammate
Amanussehi ca¼ðehi sadæ kibbisakæribhi
Parisænañca-tassannam-ahiµsæya ca guttiyæ,
Yandesesi mahævøro parittantam bha¼æma se.
(Namo me sabbabuddhænaµ), uppannænaµ Mahesinaµ,
Ta¼ha³karo mahævøro, Medha³karo mahæyaso,
Sara¼a³karo lokahito, Døpa³karo jutindharo,
Ko¼ðañño janapæmokkho, Ma³galo purisæsabho,
Sumano sumano dhøro, Revato rativaððhano,
Sobhito gu¼asampanno, Anomadassø januttamo,
Padumo lokapajjoto, Nærado varasærathø,
Padumuttaro sattasæro, Sumedho appa¥ipuggalo,
Sujæto sabbalokaggo, Piyadassø naræsabho,
Atthadassø kæru¼iko, Dhammadassø tamonudo,
Siddhattho asamo loke, Tisso ca vadataµ varo,
Phusso ca varado Buddho, Vipassø ca anþpamo,
Sikhø sabbahito satthæ, Vessabhþ sukhadæyako,
Kakusandho satthavæho, Ko¼ægamano ra¼añjaho,
Kassapo sirisampanno, Gotamo sakyapu³gavo.
Ete caññe ca sambuddhæ anekasatako¥ayo
Sabbe Buddhæ asamasamæ, sabbe Buddhæ mahiddhikæ
Sabbe dasabalþpetæ vesærajjehupægatæ
Sabbe te pa¥ijænanti æsabha¼¥hænamuttamaµ
Søhanædaµ nadantete parisæsu visæradæ
Brahmacakkaµ pavattenti loke appa¥ivattiyaµ
Upetæ Buddhadhammehi a¥¥hærasahi næyakæ
Dvattiµsa-lakkha¼þpetæ-søtyænubyañjanædharæ
Byæmappabhæya suppabhæ sabbe te mu¼ikuñjaræ
Buddhæ sabbaññuno ete sabbe khø¼æsavæ jinæ
Mahappabhæ mahætejæ mahæpaññæ mahabbalæ
Mahækæru¼ikæ dhøræ sabbesænaµ sukhævahæ
Døpæ næthæ pati¥¥hæ ca tæ¼æ le¼æ ca pæ¼inaµ
Gatø bandhþ mahassæsæ sara¼æ ca hitesino
Sadevakassa lokassa sabbe ete paræyanæ

With my head at their feet I salute these greatest of humans.
With both speech and thought I venerate those Tathægatas,
Whether lying down, seated or standing, or walking anywhere.
May they ever guard your happiness, the Buddhas, bringers of peace,
And may you, guarded by them, at peace, freed from all fear,
Released from all illness, safe from all torments,
Having transcended hatred, may you gain cessation.
By the power of their truth, their virtue and love,
May they protect and guard you in health and happiness.
In the Eastern quarter are beings of great power,
May they protect and guard you in health and happiness.
In the Southern quarter are deities of great power,
May they protect and guard you in health and happiness.
In the Western quarter are dragons of great power,
May they protect and guard you in health and happiness.
In the Northern quarter are spirits of great power,
May they protect and guard you in health and happiness.
In the East is Dhatara¥¥ha, in the South is Viru¹haka,
In the West is Virþpakkha, Kuvera rules the North.
These Four Mighty Kings, far-famed guardians of the world,
May they all be your protectors in health and happiness.
Sky-dwelling and earth-dwelling gods and dragons of great power,
May they all be your protectors in health and happiness.
For me there is no other refuge, the Buddha is my excellent refuge:
By this declaration of truth may the blessings of victory be yours.
For me there is no other refuge, the Dhamma is my excellent refuge:
By this declaration of truth may the blessings of victory be yours.
For me there is no other refuge, the Sangha is my excellent refuge:
By this declaration of truth may the blessings of victory be yours.
Whatever jewel may be found in the world, however splendid,
There is no jewel equal to the Buddha, therefore may you be blessed.
Whatever jewel may be found in the world, however splendid,
There is no jewel equal to the Dhamma, therefore may you be blessed.
Whatever jewel may be found in the world, however splendid,
There is no jewel equal to the Sangha, therefore may you be blessed.

Tesæhaµ sirasæ pæde vandæmi purisuttame
Vacasæ manasæ ceva vandæmete Tathægate
Sayane æsane ¥hæne gamane cæpi sabbadæ
Sadæ sukhena rakkhantu Buddhæ santikaræ tuvaµ
Tehi tvaµ rakkhito santo mutto sabbabhayena ca
Sabba-rogavinimutto sabba-santæpavajjito
Sabba-veramatikkanto nibbuto ca tuvaµ bhava
Tesaµ saccena sølena khantimettæbalena ca
Tepi tumhe1 anurakkhantu ærogyena sukhena ca
Puratthimasmiµ disæbhæge santi bhþtæ mahiddhikæ
Tepi tumhe anurakkhantu ærogyena sukhena ca
Dakkhi¼asmiµ disæbhæge santi devæ mahiddhikæ
Tepi tumhe anurakkhantu ærogyena sukhena ca
Pacchimasmiµ disæbhæge santi nægæ mahiddhikæ
Tepi tumhe anurakkhantu ærogyena sukhena ca
Uttarasmiµ disæbhæge santi yakkhæ mahiddhikæ
Tepi tumhe anurakkhantu ærogyena sukhena ca
Purimadisaµ Dhatara¥¥ho, dakkhi¼ena Viru¹hako
Pacchimena Virþpakkho, Kuvero uttaraµ disaµ
Cattæro te mahæræjæ lokapælæ yasassino
Tepi tumhe anurakkhantu ærogyena sukhena ca
Ækæsa¥¥hæ ca bhumma¥¥hæ devæ nægæ mahiddhikæ
Tepi tumhe anurakkhantu ærogyena sukhena ca
Natthi me sara¼aµ aññaµ Buddho me sara¼aµ varaµ
Etena saccavajjena hotu te jayama³galaµ
Natthi me sara¼aµ aññaµ Dhammo me sara¼aµ varaµ
Etena saccavajjena hotu te jayama³galaµ
Natthi me sara¼aµ aññaµ Sa³gho me sara¼aµ varaµ
Etena saccavajjena hotu te jayama³galaµ
Ya³kiñci ratanaµ loke vijjati vividhaµ puthu
Ratanaµ Buddhasamaµ natthi tasmæ sotthø bhavantu te
Ya³kiñci ratanaµ loke vijjati vividhaµ puthu
Ratanaµ Dhammasamaµ natthi tasmæ sotthø bhavantu te
Ya³kiñci ratanaµ loke vijjati vividhaµ puthu
Ratanaµ Sa³ghasamaµ natthi tasmæ sotthø bhavantu te

1

If chanting for oneself, change tumhe to amhe here and in the lines below.

If you venerate the Buddha jewel, the supreme, excellent protection,
Which benefits gods and humans, then in safety, by the Buddha’s power,
All dangers will be prevented, your sorrows will pass away.
If you venerate the Dhamma jewel, the supreme, excellent protection,
Which calms all fevered states, then in safety, by the Dhamma’s power,
All dangers will be prevented, your fears will pass away.
If you venerate the Sangha jewel, the supreme, excellent protection,
Worthy of gifts and hospitality, then in safety, by the Sangha’s power,
All dangers will be prevented, your sicknesses will pass away.
May all calamities be avoided, may all illness pass away,
May no dangers threaten you, may you be happy and long-lived,
Greeted kindly and welcome everywhere.
May four things accrue to you: long life, beauty, bliss, and strength.
Thus Ends the Twenty-Eight Buddhas’ Protection.

Sakkatvæ Buddharatanaµ osathaµ uttamaµ varaµ
Hitaµ devamanussænaµ Buddhatejena sotthinæ
Nassantupaddavæ sabbe dukkhæ vþpasamentu te
Sakkatvæ Dhammaratanaµ osathaµ uttamaµ varaµ
Pari¹æhþpasamanaµ Dhammatejena sotthinæ
Nassantupaddavæ sabbe bhayæ vþpasamentu te
Sakkatvæ Sa³gharatanaµ osathaµ uttamaµ varaµ
Æhuneyyaµ pæhuneyyaµ Sa³ghatejena sotthinæ
Nassantupaddavæ sabbe rogæ vþpasamentu te
Sabbøtiyo vivajjantu sabbarogo vinassatu
Mæ te bhavat-vantaræyo sukhø døghæyuko bhava
Abhivædanasølissa niccaµ vuððhæpacæyino
Cattæro dhammæ vaððhanti æyu va¼¼o sukhaµ balaµ
Æ¥ænæ¥iya Parittaµ ni¥¥hitaµ

PART FOUR: FORMAL REQUESTS
Requesting a Dhamma Talk

70

Acknowledging the Teaching

70

Requesting Paritta Chanting

71

Requesting the Three Refuges and the Five Precepts

72

Requesting the Three Refuges and the Eight Precepts

74

REQUESTING A DHAMMA TALK
(After bowing three times, with hands joined in añjali, recite the following:)
Brahmæ c÷a lokædhip÷atø s÷ahamp÷ati
K÷atañj÷alø an÷adhiv÷araµ ÷ayæc÷atha
Sant×ødha s÷attæpp÷ar÷ajakkh÷a-jætikæ
Deset÷u dhammaµ ÷an÷ukamp÷imaµ p÷ajaµ
(Bow three times again.)
The Brahma god Sahampati, Lord of the world,
With palms joined in reverence, requested a favor:
“ Beings are here with but little dust in their eyes,
Pray, teach the Dhamma out of compassion for them.”

ACKNOWLEDGING THE TEACHING
One person:

H×anda mayaµ dhammakath×æya s×ædhuk÷æraµ dadæmase.
Now let us express our approval of this Dhamma Teaching.

Response:

Sædhu, sædhu, sædhu, an×umodæmi.
It is well, I appreciate it.

REQUESTING PARITTA CHANTING
(After bowing three times, with hands joined in añjali, recite the following:)
Vipatti-pa¥ibæh×æya sabb÷a-sampatt÷i-siddh÷iyæ
Sabbadukkha-vinæs×æya
Parittaµ brþth÷a ma³g÷alaµ
Vipatti-pa¥ibæh×æya sabb÷a-sampatt÷i-siddh÷iyæ
Sabbabhaya-vinæs×æya
Parittaµ brþth÷a ma³g÷alaµ
Vipatti-pa¥ibæh×æya sabb÷a-sampatt÷i-siddh÷iyæ
Sabbaroga-vinæs×æya
Parittaµ brþth÷a ma³g÷alaµ
For warding off misfortune, for the arising of good fortunes,
For the dispelling of all dukkha,
May you chant a blessing and protection.
For warding off misfortune, for the arising of good fortunes,
For the dispelling of all fear,
May you chant a blessing and protection.
For warding off misfortune, for the arising of good fortunes,
For the dispelling of all sickness,
May you chant a blessing and protection.
(Bow three times.)

REQUESTING THE THREE REFUGES AND THE FIVE PRECEPTS
(After bowing three times, with hands joined in añjali, recite as a group:)
Mayaµ1 bhante2 tisara¼ena s÷aha pañca s×ølæni y÷æcæma3
Dutiyampi mayaµ bhante tisara¼ena s÷aha pañca s×ølæni y÷æcæma
Tatiyampi mayaµ bhante tisara¼ena s÷aha pañca s×ølæni y÷æcæma
We, Venerable Sir, request the Three Refuges and the Five Precepts.
For the second time, we, Venerable Sir, request the Three Refuges and the Five Precepts.
For the third time, we, Venerable Sir, request the Three Refuges and the Five Precepts.

TAKING THE THREE REFUGES
(Repeat, after the leader has chanted three times:)
Namo tassa bh÷agavato ar÷ahato s×ammæs×ambuddhassa
Namo tassa bh÷agavato ar÷ahato s×ammæs×ambuddhassa
Namo tassa bh÷agavato ar÷ahato s×ammæs×ambuddhassa
H×om×age to th÷e Bl÷essed, N×oble, ÷and P÷erfectly Enl×ightened One.
H×om×age to th÷e Bl÷essed, N×oble, ÷and P÷erfectly Enl×ightened One.
H×om×age to th÷e Bl÷essed, N×oble, ÷and P÷erfectly Enl×ightened One.
Buddhaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
Dhammaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
S×a³ghaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
To the Buddha I go for refuge.
To the Dhamma I go for refuge.
To the Sangha I go for refuge.
Dutiyampi B×uddhaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
Dutiyampi Dh×ammaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
Dutiyampi S×a³ghaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
For the second time, to the Buddha I go for refuge.
For the second time, to the Dhamma I go for refuge.
For the second time, to the Sangha I go for refuge.

1

When one person is chanting as an individual, Mayaµ becomes Ahaµ; if one person
is requesting on behalf of a group, Mayaµ is used.
2
When requesting from a nun, bhante becomes ayye. When requesting from a lay
person, bhante becomes mitta.
3
When one person is chanting as an individual, y÷æcæma becomes y÷æcæmi; if one
person is requesting on behalf of a group, y÷æcæma is used.

Tatiyampi B×uddhaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
Tatiyampi Dh×ammaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
Tatiyampi S×a³ghaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
For the third time, to the Buddha I go for refuge.
For the third time, to the Dhamma I go for refuge.
For the third time, to the Sangha I go for refuge.
Leader:

Tisara¼a-gamanaµ ni¥¥hitaµ
This completes the going to the Three Refuges.

Response:

Æma bhante/ayye/mitta
Yes, Venerable Sir/Sister/Friend.

THE FIVE PRECEPTS
(To undertake the precepts, repeat each precept after the leader.)
1. Pæ¼ætipætæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd÷iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from taking the life of any living creature.
2. Adinnædænæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd™iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from taking that which is not given.
3. Kæmesu micch×æcæræ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd÷iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from sexual misconduct.
4. Mus×ævædæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd÷iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from false and harmful speech.
5. Suræmeraya-majja-pamæda¥¥h×ænæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadam s×amæd÷iyæmi.

I undertake the precept to refrain from consuming intoxicating drink and
drugs which lead to carelessness.
Leader:

Imæni pañca sikkh×æpadæni
S×ølena sug÷atiµ yanti
S×ølena bhog÷as×ampadæ
S×ølena nibb÷utiµ yanti
Tasm×æ s×ølaµ vis×odhaye
These are the Five Precepts;
virtue is the source of happiness,
virtue is the source of true wealth,
virtue is the source of peacefulness.
Therefore let virtue be purified.

Response:

Sædhu, sædhu, sædhu

(Bow three times.)

REQUESTING THE THREE REFUGES AND THE EIGHT PRECEPTS

(After bowing three times, with hands joined in añjali, recite as a group:)
Mayaµ1 bhante2 tisara¼ena s÷aha a¥¥ha s×ølæni y÷æcæma3
Dutiyampi mayaµ bhante tisara¼ena s÷aha a¥¥ha s×ølæni y÷æcæma
Tatiyampi mayaµ bhante tisara¼ena s÷aha a¥¥ha s×ølæni y÷æcæma
We, Venerable Sir, request the Three Refuges and the Eight Precepts.
For the second time, we, Venerable Sir, request the Three Refuges and the Eight Precepts
For the third time, we, Venerable Sir, request the Three Refuges and the Eight Precepts.

TAKING THE THREE REFUGES
(Repeat, after the leader has chanted three times:)
Namo tassa bh÷agavato ar÷ahato s×ammæs×ambuddhassa
Namo tassa bh÷agavato ar÷ahato s×ammæs×ambuddhassa
Namo tassa bh÷agavato ar÷ahato s×ammæs×ambuddhassa
H×om×age to th÷e Bl÷essed, N×oble, ÷and P÷erfectly Enl×ightened One.
H×om×age to th÷e Bl÷essed, N×oble, ÷and P÷erfectly Enl×ightened One.
H×om×age to th÷e Bl÷essed, N×oble, ÷and P÷erfectly Enl×ightened One.
B×uddhaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
Dh×ammaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
S×a³ghaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
To the Buddha I go for refuge.
To the Dhamma I go for refuge.
To the Sangha I go for refuge.
Dutiyampi B×uddhaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
Dutiyampi Dh×ammaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
Dutiyampi S×a³ghaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
For the second time, to the Buddha I go for refuge.
For the second time, to the Dhamma I go for refuge.
For the second time, to the Sangha I go for refuge.

1

When one person is chanting as an individual, Mayaµ becomes Ahaµ; if one person
is requesting on behalf of a group, Mayaµ is used.
2
When requesting from a nun, bhante becomes ayye. When requesting from a lay
person, bhante becomes mitta.
3
When one person is chanting as an individual, y÷æcæma becomes y÷æcæmi; if one
person is requesting on behalf of a group, y÷æcæma is used.

Tatiyampi B×uddhaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
Tatiyampi Dh×ammaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
Tatiyampi S×a³ghaµ sara¼aµ gacchæmi
For the third time, to the Buddha I go for refuge.
For the third time, to the Dhamma I go for refuge.
For the third time, to the Sangha I go for refuge.
Leader:

Tisara¼a-gamanaµ ni¥¥hitaµ
This completes the going to the Three Refuges.

Response:

Æma bhante/ayye/mitta
Yes, Venerable Sir/Sister/Friend.

THE EIGHT PRECEPTS
(To undertake the precepts, repeat each precept after the leader.)
1. Pæ¼ætipætæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd÷iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from taking the life of any living creature.
2. Adinnædænæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd÷iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from taking that which is not given.
3. Abrahmacariyæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd÷iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from any kind of sexual activity.
4. Mus×ævædæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd÷iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from false and harmful speech.
5. Suræmeraya-majja-pamæda¥¥h×ænæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd÷iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from consuming intoxicating drink and drugs
which lead to carelessness.
6. Vikælabhojanæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd÷iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from eating at inappropriate times.
7. Nacca-gøta-vædita-visþkad×assanæ-mælæ-gandha-vilepana-dhæra¼a-ma¼ðana
vibhþsana¥¥h×ænæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd÷iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from entertainment, beautification, and
adornment.
8. Uccæsayana-mah×æsayanæ ver×ama¼ø sikkh×æpadaµ s×amæd÷iyæmi.
I undertake the precept to refrain from lying on a high or luxurious sleeping place.

Leader:

Imæni a¥¥ha sikkh×æpadæni s×amæd™iyæmi

Response:

Imæni a¥¥ha sikkh×æpadæni s×amæd™iyæmi
Imæni a¥¥ha sikkh×æpadæni s×amæd™iyæmi
Imæni a¥¥ha sikkh×æpadæni s×amæd™iyæmi
I undertake these Eight Precepts.
I undertake these Eight Precepts.
I undertake these Eight Precepts.

Leader:

Imæni a¥¥ha sikkh×æpadæni
S×ølena sug÷atiµ yanti
S×ølena bhog÷as×ampadæ
S×ølena nibb÷utiµ yanti
Tasm×æ s×ølaµ vis×odhaye
These are the Eight Precepts;
virtue is the source of happiness,
virtue is the source of true wealth,
virtue is the source of peacefulness.
Therefore let virtue be purified.

Response:

Sædhu, sædhu, sædhu

(Bow three times.)

APPENDIX
Pæli Phonetics and Pronunciation

78

Chanting Technique

79

Glossary of Pæli Terms

80

PÆLI PHONETICS AND PRONUNCIATION
Pæli is the original scriptural language of Theravæda Buddhism. It was a spoken
language, closely related to Sanskrit, with no written script of its own. As written forms
have emerged, they have been in the letterings of other languages (e.g., Sanskrit,
Sinhalese, Burmese, Thai, Roman). Thus the Roman lettering used here is pronounced
just as one would expect, with the following clarifications.
Vowels are of two types:
Short
a as in about
i as in hit
u as in put

Long
æ as in father
ø as in machine
þ as in rule
e as in grey
o as in more
Exception: e and o change to short sounds in syllables ending in consonants. They are
then pronounced as in “get” and “ox.”

Consonants are mostly as one would expect, with a few additional rules:
c as in ancient (like ch but unaspirated)
µ, ³ as ng in sang
ñ as ny in canyon
v rather softer than the English v; near w
bh, ch, dh, ðh, gh, jh, kh, ph, th, ¥h
These two-lettered notations with h denote an aspirated, airy sound, distinct from the
hard, crisp sound of the single consonant. They should be considered as one unit.
However, the other combinations with h, i.e., lh, mh, ñh, and vh, do count as two
consonants.
Examples:
th as t in t ongue. Never pronounced as in the.
ph as p in palate. Never pronounced as in photo.
ð, ðh, ¹, ¼, ¥, ¥h
These retroflex consonants have no English equivalents. They are sounded by curling
the tip of the tongue back against the palate.
Full-length syllables contain long vowels (æ, ø, þ, e, o) or end with µ or having
ended in a consonant, are followed by a syllable beginning with a consonant (e.g.,
mag·ga, hon·ti, Bud·dha).
Remember that bh, dh, etc. count as single consonants. (Therefore am·hæ·kaµ, but
sa·dham·maµ, not sad·ham·maµ.)
Half-length syllables end in short vowels.

CHANTING TECHNIQUE
If you find it difficult to understand the practice of chanting (or even if you find it easy),
the general rule of thumb is to listen carefully to what the leader and the group are
chanting and to follow, keeping the same pitch, tempo, and speed. All voices should
blend together as one.
Punctuation and Tonal Marks
(Round Brackets) indicate words chanted only by the leader; words in [square brackets]
are chanted only by the responder.
The triangular tonal marks indicate changes in pitch. Longer marks also indicate a
lengthening of the syllable.
high tone
n×oble
low tone
bl÷essed
long low tone
h¯omage
long mid tone
th°ese
Añjali
Chanting, and making formal requests, is done with the hands in añjali. This is a gesture
of respect, made by placing the palms together directly in front of the chest, with the
fingers aligned and pointing upwards.
A Note on Hyphenation in the Text
As an aid to understanding, some of the longer Pæli words in the text have been
hyphenated into the words from which they are compounded. This does not affect the
pronunciation in any way.

GLOSSARY OF PÆLI TERMS
anattæ
Literally, “not-self,” i.e. impersonal, without individual essence; neither a person nor
belonging to a person. One of the three characteristics of conditioned phenomena.
anicca
Transient, impermanent, unstable, having the nature to arise and pass away. One of
the three characteristics of conditioned phenomena.
arahaµ/arahant
Literally, “worthy one.” A term applied to all enlightened beings. As an epithet of the
Buddha alone, “Lord” is used.
ariyapuggalæ
“Noble beings.” There are eight kinds: those who are working on or have achieved
the four different stages of realization.
bhagavæ
Bountiful, with good fortune. When used as an epithet of the Buddha, “the Fortunate
One,” “the Blessed One.”
bhikkhu
A Buddhist monk who lives as an alms mendicant, abiding by 227 training precepts
that define a life of renunciation and simplicity.
brahmæ
Celestial being; a god in one of the higher spiritual realms.
Buddha
The Understanding One, the One Who Is Awake, who knows things as they are; a
potential in every human being. The historical Buddha, Siddhatta Gotama, lived and
taught between 563 and 483 B.C.
deva
A celestial being. Less refined than a brahmæ, as a deva is still in a sensual realm,
albeit a very refined one.
Dhamma (Sanskrit: Dharma.)
The Teaching of the Buddha as contained in the scriptures; not dogmatic in character,
but more like a raft or vehicle to convey the disciple to deliverance. Also, the Truth
towards which that Teaching points; that which is beyond words, concepts, or
intellectual understanding.

dukkha
Literally, “hard to bear.” Dis-ease, restlessness of mind, anguish, conflict,
unsatisfactoriness, discontent, suffering. One of the three characteristics of
conditioned phenomena.
kamma (Sanskrit: karma.)
Cause; actions created or recreated by habitual impulse, intention, volition, natural
energies.
Mæra
Personification of evil forces. During the Buddha’s struggle for enlightenment, Mæra
manifested frightening and enticing forms to try to turn him back from his goal.
Nibbæna (Sanskrit: Nirvæna.)
Literally, “cooled.” The state of liberation from all suffering and defilements, the goal
of the Buddhist Path.
Paccekabuddha
Solitary Buddha. Someone enlightened by his or her own efforts, without relying on a
teacher, but who does not have a following of disciples, which the Buddha had.
pañcupædænakkhandhæ
The five aggregates, physical and mental, that is: rþpa, vedanæ, saññæ, sa³khæræ,
viññæ¼a. Attachment to any of these as “This is mine,” “I am this,” or “This is my self”
is upædæna—clinging or grasping.
paritta
Verses chanted particularly for blessing and protection.
puñña
The accumulation of good fortune, blessings, or well-being resulting from the practice
of Dhamma.
rþpa
Form or matter. The physical elements that make up the body, i.e. earth, water, fire,
and air (solidity, cohesion, temperature, and vibration).
Sa³gha
The community of those who practice the Buddha’s Way. More specifically, those
who have formally committed themselves to the lifestyle of mendicant monks and
nuns. The “four pairs, the eight kinds of noble beings” are those who are on the path
to or who have realized the fruition of the four stages of enlightenment: stream entry,
once return, nonreturn, and arahantship.

sa³khæræ
Mental formations. All mental states apart from feeling and perception that color one’s
thoughts and make them either good, bad, or neutral.
saññæ
Perception, the mental function of recognition.
Tathægata
“Thus gone” or “thus come.” One who has gone beyond suffering and mortality; one
who experiences things as they are, without delusion. The epithet that the Buddha
applied to himself.
threefold bliss
Mundane bliss, celestial bliss, and Nibbænic bliss.
vedanæ
Feeling; physical and mental feelings, either pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral.
viññæ¼a
Sense consciousness; the mental process that sees, hears, smells, tastes, touches, and
thinks.

