Table of Contents

N’atthi me saraõaÿ a¤¤aÿ,

Saïgho me saraõaÿ varaÿ

Etena sacca-vajjena

Hotu te† jaya-maïgalaÿ.

Yaï ki¤ci ratanaÿ loke

Vijjati vividhaÿ puthu

Ratanaÿ Buddha-samaÿ n’atthi Tasmà sotthã bhavantu te†.
Yaï ki¤ci ratanaÿ loke

Vijjati vividhaÿ puthu

Dhamma-cakkappavattana Sutta

Ratanaÿ Dhamma-samaÿ n’atthi Tasmà sotthã bhavantu te†.

Discourse on Setting in Motion the Wheel of the Dhamma
Introduction Chant . . . . . . . . . . . page 1
Sutta and Translation . . . . . . . . . page 2

Yaï ki¤ci ratanaÿ loke

Vijjati vividhaÿ puthu

Ratanaÿ Saïgha-samaÿ n’atthi

Tasmà sotthã bhavantu te†.

Sakkatvà Buddha-ratanaÿ,

Osathaÿ uttamaÿ varaÿ;

Anatta-lakkhaõa Sutta

Hitaÿ deva-manussànaÿ,

Buddha-tejena sotthinà;

Discourse on the Characteristic of Non-self.
Introduction Chant . . . . . . . . . . . page 12
Sutta and Translation . . . . . . . . . page 12 & 13

Nassant’upaddavà sabbe,

Dukkhà våpasamentu te†.

Sakkatvà Dhamma-ratanaÿ,

Osathaÿ uttamaÿ varaÿ;

Pariëàhåpasamanaÿ,

Dhamma-tejena sotthinà;

âditta-pariyàya Sutta

Nassant’upaddavà sabbe,

Bhayà våpasamentu te†.

The Fire Sermon
Introduction Chant . . . . . . . . . . . page 22
Sutta and Translation . . . . . . . . . page 22 & 23

Sakkatvà Saïgha-ratanaÿ,

Osathaÿ uttamaÿ varaÿ;

âhuneyyaÿ pàhuneyyaÿ,

Saïgha-tejena sotthinà;

Nassant’upaddavà sabbe,

Rogà våpasamentu te†.

Sabb’ãtiyo vivajjantu,

Sabba-rogo vinassatu;

Mà te bhavatv-antaràyo,

Sukhã dãgh’àyuko bhava.

Abhivàdana-sãlissa,

Niccaÿ vuóóhà’pacàyino;

Cattàro dhammà vaóóhanti,

âyu vaõõo sukhaÿ balaÿ.

âñànàñiya Paritta
The ‘Twenty-Eight Buddhas’ Auspicious Blessing Chant
Introduction Chant . . . . . . . . . . . page 30
Paritta and Translation . . . . . . . . . page 30 & 31

âñànàñiya Parittaÿ Niññhitaÿ.

I have no other refuge—the Sangha is my excellent refuge,
With this declaration of truth may you celebrate victory.
Whatever jewel is found in the world, manifest and plentiful,
It is not equal to the Buddha—therefore may you be blessed.

Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta

Whatever jewel is found in the world, manifest and plentiful,
It is not equal to the Dhamma—therefore may you be blessed.

Solo introduction:

Whatever jewel is found in the world, manifest and plentiful,
It is not equal to the Sangha—therefore may you be blessed.

Pañhamaÿ yaÿ adesesi

Dhammacakkaÿ anuttaraÿ

Sammadeva pavattento

Loke appañivattiyaÿ

Having revered the Buddha-jewel, the balm supreme, excellent,
For the good of devas and humans, by the Buddha’s blessed
power,
May all ills be destroyed, all your sorrows assuaged.
Having revered the Dhamma-jewel, the balm supreme, excellent,
Suppressing fever, by the Dhamma's blessed power,
May all ills be destroyed, all your fears be allayed.
Having revered the Sangha-jewel, the balm supreme, excellent,
Worthy of gifts, of hospitality, by the Sangha's blessed power,
May all ills be destroyed, may all your sickness perish.

Yatthàkkhàtà ubho antà

Pañipatti ca majjhimà

Catåsvàriyasaccesu

Visuddhaÿ ¤àõadassanaÿ

Desitaÿ dhammaràjena

Sammàsambodhikittanaÿ

Nàmena vissutaÿ suttaÿ

Dhammacakkappavattanam

Veyyàkaraõapàthena

Saïgãtantambhaõàma se.

May there be no hindrance for you, may you be happy and
long-lived.
Being one of devout character, respecting the elders,
Four things will increase for you:
long life, beauty, happiness and strength.
~•~

Anuttaraÿ abhisambodhiÿ Sambujjhitvà Tathàgato

This is the first teaching of the Tathàgata on attaining to unexcelled, perfect enlightenment. Here is the perfect turning
of the incomparable wheel of truth, inestimable wherever it
is expounded in the world. Disclosed here are the two extremes, and the middle way, with the four noble truths and
the purified knowledge and vision pointed out by the Lord of
Dhamma. Let us chant together this sutta proclaiming the supreme, independent enlightenment that is widely renowned
as The Turning of the Wheel of the Dhamma.

Discourse on Setting in Motion
the Wheel of the Dhamma
Thus have I heard: Once, the Blessed One was staying in
the Deer Park at Isipatana, near Baranasi. There the
Blessed One addressed the group of five bhikkhus:
There are two extremes, bhikkhus, which should not be
followed by one who has gone forth from the worldly life:
sensual indulgence, which is low, course, vulgar, ignoble
and unprofitable; and self-torment, which is painful,
ignoble and unprofitable. Bhikkhus, by avoiding these two
extremes the Tathàgata has realised the Middle Way that
gives vision and understanding, and leads to peace, higher
wisdom, enlightenment and nibbàna.
And what is the middle way realised by the Tathàgata,
which gives vision and understanding, and leads to peace,
higher wisdom, enlightenment and nibbàna? It is this—
the Noble Eightfold Path, namely, right understanding
(sammà diññhi), right intention (sammà saïkappo) right
speech (sammà vàcà), right action (sammà kammanto),
right livelihood (sammà àjãvo), right effort (sammà
vàyàmo), right mindfulness (sammà sati) and right
concentration (sammà samàdhi). This, bhikkhus, is the
middle way realised by the Tathàgata, which gives vision
and understanding, and leads to peace, higher wisdom,
enlightenment and nibbàna.
Now this, bhikkhus, is the Noble Truth of dukkha (unsatisfactoriness): birth is dukkha; ageing is dukkha; and death
is dukkha; sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair are
dukkha; association with the unloved is dukkha; separation from the loved is dukkha;

Sayane àsane ñhàne

Gamane càpi sabbadà.

Sadà sukhena rakkhantu

Buddhà santi-karà tuvaÿ

Tehi tvaÿ rakkhito santo

Mutto sabba-bhayena ca.

Sabba-roga-vinimutto

Sabba-santàpa-vajjito

Sabba-veram-atikkanto

Nibbuto ca tuvaÿ bhava.

Tesaÿ saccena sãlena

Khanti-mettà-balena ca

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

ârogyena sukhena ca.

Puratthimasmiÿ disà-bhàge

Santi bhåtà mah’iddhikà

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

ârogyena sukhena ca.

Dakkhiõasmiÿ disà-bhàge

Santi devà mah’iddhikà

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

ârogyena sukhena ca.

Pacchimasmasmiÿ disà-bhàge Santi nàgà mah’iddhikà
Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu
Uttarasmiÿ disà-bhàge

ârogyena sukhena ca.
Santi yakkhà mah’iddhikà

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

ârogyena sukhena ca.

Purima-disaÿ Dhataraññho

Dakkhiõena Viruëhako

Pacchimena Viråpakkho

Kuvero uttaraÿ disaÿ.

Cattàro te mahà-ràjà

Loka-pàlà yasassino

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

ârogyena sukhena ca.

âkàsaññhà ca bhummaññhà

Devà nàgà mah’iddhikà

Te pi tumhe* anurakkhantu

ârogyena sukhena ca.

N’atthi me saraõaÿ a¤¤aÿ,

Buddho me saraõaÿ varaÿ

Etena sacca-vajjena

Hotu te† jaya-maïgalaÿ

N’atthi me saraõaÿ a¤¤aÿ,

Dhammo me saraõaÿ varaÿ

Etena sacca-vajjena

Hotu te† jaya-maïgalaÿ

If chanting for oneself change: * to amhe; change † to me.

Lying, sitting, standing, walking, indeed everywhere,
May the calm-making Buddhas always protect you with bliss,
And you, protected by them, freed from all fear,
Freed from all illness, freed from all torments,
Having gone beyond hatred, may you attain Nibbàna.
By the truth of these things, by discipline, patience and the
power of loving-kindness,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
In the eastern direction are beings of mighty power,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
In the southern direction are beings of mighty power,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
In the western direction are beings of mighty power,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
In the northern direction are beings of mighty power,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
The east is ruled by Dhataraññha, the south by Viruëhaka,
The west by Viråpakkha, Kuvera rules the north,
These four Great Kings are the far-famed guardians of the world,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
Devas of the sky and earth, nàgas of mighty power,
May they guard you in health and happiness.
I have no other refuge—the Buddha is my excellent refuge,
With this declaration of truth may you celebrate victory.
I have no other refuge—the Dhamma is my excellent refuge,
With this declaration of truth may you celebrate victory.

Dhamma-cakkappavattana Sutta
[Evam-me sutaÿ.] Ekaÿ samayaÿ Bhagavà,
Bàràõasiyaÿ viharati Isipatane Migadàye. Tatra kho
Bhagavà pa¤ca-vaggiye bhikkhå àmantesi:
“Dve’me bhikkhave antà pabbajitena na sevitabbà. Yo
càyaÿ kàmesu kàma-sukh’allikànuyogo, hãno gammo
pothujjaniko anariyo anattha-sa¤hito, yo càyaÿ attakilamathànuyogo, dukkho anariyo anattha-sa¤hito.
Ete’te bhikkhave ubho ante anupagamma, majjhimà
pañipadà Tathàgatena abhi-sambuddhà, cakkhu-karaõã
¤àõa-karaõã upasamàya abhi¤¤àya sambodhàya
nibbànàya saÿvattati.
Katamà ca sà bhikkhave majjhimà pañipadà Tathàgatena
abhisambuddhà, cakkhu-karaõã ¤àõa-karaõã upasamàya
abhi¤¤àya sam-bodhàya nibbànàya saÿvattati? Ayameva ariyo aññh’aïgiko maggo, seyyathãdaÿ, sammà-diññhi
sammà-saïkappo, sammà-vàcà sammà-kammanto
sammà-àjãvo, sammà- vàyàmo sammà-sati sammàsamàdhi. Ayaÿ kho sà bhikkhave majjhimà pañipadà
Tathàgatena abhisambuddhà, cakkhu-karaõã
¤àõa-karaõã upasamàya abhi¤¤àya sam-bodhàya
nibbànàya saÿvattati.
Idaÿ kho pana bhikkhave dukkhaÿ ariya-saccaÿ: Jàti
pi dukkhà jarà pi dukkhà maraõam pi dukkhaÿ, sokaparideva-dukkha-domanass’upàyàsà pi dukkhà, appiyehi
sampayogo dukkho, piyehi vippayogo dukkho,

not attaining one’s wishes is dukkha; in brief, the five categories of the grasping mind* are dukkha.
Now this, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of the origin of
dukkha: it is the craving that conditions renewal of being,
which is accompanied by passionate pleasure, and takes delight in this and that object: namely, sensual craving; craving to become; craving for annihilation. Now this, bhikkhus,
is the noble truth of the cessation of dukkha: it is the complete and passionless cessation of that craving; giving it up,
abandoning it, being released and detached from it. Now
this, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of the way leading to the
cessation of dukkha: it is this—the noble eightfold path,
namely: right understanding, right intention, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration.
1. (i) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of dukkha,”
there arose in me vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom,
light, concerning things unknown before.
(ii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of dukkha,
and this has to be understood,” there arose in me vision,
knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things
unknown before.
(iii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of dukkha,
and this dukkha has been understood,” there arose in me vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things
unknown before.
2. (i) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the
source of dukkha,” there arose in me vision, knowledge,
insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
(ii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the source
of dukkha, and this source has to be abandoned,” there
arose in me vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.

Padumo loka-pajjoto

Nàrado vara-sàrathã

Padum’uttaro satta-sàro

Sumedho appañipuggalo.

Sujàto sabba-lok’aggo

Piya-dassã nar’àsabho

Attha-dassã kàruõiko

Dhamma-dassã tamo-nudo.

Siddhattho asamo loke

Tisso ca vadataÿ varo

Pusso ca varado Buddho

Vipassã ca anåpamo.

Sikhã sabba-hito satthà

Vessabhå sukha-dàyako

Kakusandho sattha-vàho

Konàgamano raõa¤-jaho.

Kassapo siri-sampanno

Gotamo sakya-puïgavo.

Ete c’a¤¤e ca Sambuddhà

Aneka-sata-koñayo

Sabbe Buddhà asama-samà

Sabbe Buddhà mah’iddhikà.

Sabbe dasa-balåpetà

Vesàrajjeh’upàgatà

Sabbe te pañijànanti

âsabhaõñhànam’uttamaÿ.

Sãha-nàdaÿ nadant’ete

Parisàsu visàradà

Brahma-cakkaÿ pavattenti

Loke appañivattiyaÿ.

Upetà Buddha-dhammehi

Aññhàrasahi nàyakà

Dvattiÿsa-lakkhaõåpetà

Sãtyànubya¤janà-dharà.

Byàmappabhàya suppabhà

Sabbe te muni-ku¤jarà

Buddhà sabba¤-¤uno ete

Sabbe khãõ’àsavà jinà.

Mahappabhà mahà-tejà

Mahà-pa¤¤à mahabbalà

Mahà-kàruõikà dhãrà

Sabbesànaÿ sukhà-vahà.

Dãpà nàthà patiññhà ca

Tàõà leõà ca pàõinaÿ

Gatã bandhå mah’assàsà

Saraõà ca hitesino.

Sadevakassa lokassa

Sabbe ete paràyanà

*Form (råpa), feeling (vedanà), perception (sa¤¤à), mental forma-

Tesàhaÿ sirasà pàde

Vandàmi puris’uttame.

Vacasà manasà c’eva

Vandàm’ete Tathàgate

tions (saïkhàrà), consciousness (vi¤¤àõa).

Padumo, light of the world, Nàrado, true charioteer,
Padumuttaro, the perfect being, Sumedho, without compare,
Sujàto, peak of all the world, Piyadassã, great among humans,
Atthadassã, the compassionate, Dhammadassã, dispeller of
darkness,
Siddhatto, incomparable in the world, Tisso, excellent in
speech,
Pusso Buddha, giver of the best, Vipassã, without equal,
Sikhã, the all-benefiting teacher, Vessabhå, the giver of bliss,
Kakusandho, the caravan leader, Konàgamano, who turns
away from turbulent passions,
Kassapo, abounding in glory, Gotamo, leader of the Sakyans.
These and other Supreme Buddhas, many hundred thousands,
All Buddhas, peerless, of mighty power,
All endowed with ten powers, having attained perfect confidence,
All hold the leading supreme position,
They roar the lion’s roar with confidence in the assemblies,
They turn the excellent wheel that cannot be turned back,
Leaders endowed with the 18 Buddha attributes,
Bearers of the 32 marks and 80 minor marks,
With a six-foot halo shining bright, all these chiefs among sages,
These all-knowing Buddhas, all Arahants, conquerors,
Of great light, ardour, wisdom and power,
With great compassion, wise bringers of bliss to all,
Lamps, guides, supports, shelters, and protectors of beings,
Comforting kinsmen on the way, protectors and well-wishers,
All the highest peak of this world with its devas,
Them I salute, highest of beings, with my head at their feet,
With voice and heart alike I salute these Tathàgatas,

yam-p’icchaÿ na labhati tam pi dukkhaÿ, saïkhittena
pa¤c’upàdànakkhandhà dukkhà. Idaÿ kho pana bhikkhave
dukkha-samudayo ariya-saccaÿ: Yà’yaÿ taõhà
ponobbhavikà nandi-ràga-sahagatà tatra-tatràbhinandinã,
seyyathãdaÿ, kàma-taõhà bhava-taõhà vibhava-taõhà.
Idaÿ kho pana bhikkhave dukkha-nirodho ariya-saccaÿ:
Yo tassà yeva taõhàya asesa-viràga-nirodho càgo pañinissaggo mutti anàlayo. Idaÿ kho pana bhikkhave dukkhanirodha-gàminã-pañipadà ariya-saccaÿ: ayam-eva ariyo
aññh’aïgiko maggo, seyyathãdaÿ, sammà-diññhi
sammà-saïkappo, sammà-vàcà sammà-kammanto
sammà-àjãvo, sammà-vàyàmo sammà-sati sammà-samàdhi.
[Idaÿ dukkhaÿ] ariya-saccan-ti me bhikkhave, pubbe
ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuÿ udapàdi ¤àõaÿ
udapàdi pa¤¤à udapàdi vijjà udapàdi àloko udapàdi. Taÿ
kho pan’idaÿ dukkhaÿ ariya-saccaÿ pari¤¤eyyan- ti me
bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuÿ
udapàdi ¤àõaÿ udapàdi pa¤¤à udapàdi vijjà udapàdi àloko
udapàdi. Taÿ kho pan’idaÿ dukkhaÿ ariya-saccaÿ
pari¤¤àtan-ti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu
dhammesu, cakkhuÿ udapàdi ¤àõaÿ udapàdi pa¤¤à
udapàdi vijjà udapàdi àloko udapàdi.
Idaÿ dukkha-samudayo ariya-saccan-ti me bhikkhave,
pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuÿ udapàdi ¤àõaÿ
udapàdi pa¤¤à udapàdi vijjà udapàdi àloko udapàdi. Taÿ
kho pan’idaÿ dukkha-samudayo ariya-saccaÿ pahàtabbanti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuÿ
udapàdi ¤àõaÿ udapàdi pa¤¤à udapàdi vijjà udapàdi àloko

Solo Introduction:
(iii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the
source of dukkha, and this source of dukkha has been
abandoned,” there arose in me vision, knowledge, insight,
wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.

Appasannehi nàthassa

Sàsane sàdhu-sammate

Amanussehi caõóehi

Sadà kibbi-sakàribhi

Parisàna¤-ca tassanna-

-m-ahiÿsàya ca guttiyà

3. ( i) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the
cessation of dukkha,” there arose in me vision, knowledge,
insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
(ii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the
cessation of dukkha, and this cessation of dukkha has to be
realised,” there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge,
insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
(iii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the
cessation of dukkha, and this cessation of dukkha has been
realised,” there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge,
insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.

Yan-desesi mahà-vãro

Parittan-tam-bhaõàma se.

4. (i) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the way
leading to the cessation of dukkha,” there arose in me,
bhikkhus, vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown before.
(ii) With the thought: “This is the noble truth of the way
leading to the cessation of dukkha, and this way has to be
developed,” there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown
before.
(iii) With the thought: ”This is the noble truth of the way
leading to the cessation of dukkha, and this way has been
developed,” there arose in me, bhikkhus, vision, knowledge, insight, wisdom, light, concerning things unknown
before.
So long, bhikkhus, as my knowledge and vision of reality
regarding these four noble truths, in these three phases
—these twelve aspects—was not fully clear to me,

âñànàñiya Parittaÿ
[Vipassissa nam’atthu,]

Cakkhumantassa sirãmato;

Sikhissa pi nam’atthu,

Sabba-bhåtànukampino.

Vessabhussa nam’atthu,

Nhàtakassa tapassino;

Nam’atthu Kakusandhassa,

Màra-senappamaddino,

Konàgamanassa nam’atthu,

Bràhmaõassa vusãmato;

Kassapassa nam’atthu,

Vippamuttassa sabbadhi.

Aïgãrasassa nam’atthu,

Sakya-puttassa sirãmato;

Yo imaÿ dhammam-adesesi,

Sabba-dukkhàpanådanaÿ.

Ye càpi nibbutà loke,

Yathà-bhåtaÿ vipassisuÿ;

Te janà apisuõà,

Mahantà vãta-sàradà.

Hitaÿ deva-manussànaÿ,

Yaÿ namassanti Gotamaÿ;

Vijjà-caraõa-sampannaÿ,

Mahantaÿ vãta-sàradaÿ.

Vijjà-caraõa-sampannaÿ,

Buddhaÿ vandàma Gotaman-ti.

[Namo me sabba buddhànaÿ] Uppannànaÿ mahesinaÿ
Taõhaï-karo mahà-vãro

Medhaï-karo mahà-yaso.

Saraõaï-karo loka-hito

Dãpaï-karo jutin-dharo

Koõóa¤¤o jana-pàmokkho

Maïgalo puris’àsabho.

Sumano sumano dhãro

Revato rati-vaóóhano

Sobhito guõa-sampanno

Anoma-dassã jan’uttamo.

Solo Introduction:
We will now recite the discourse given by the Great Hero
(The Buddha),
As a protection for virtue-loving human beings,
Against harm from all evil-doing, malevolent non-humans
Who are displeased with the Buddha’s Teachings.

The âñànàñiya Protectiont
(‘The Twenty-Eight Buddhas’)
Praise be to Vipassã, possessed of vision and glory,
Praise be to Sikhã too, sympathetic to all beings,
Praise be to Vessabhu, cleansed of stains, and of ardent ways,
Praise be to Konàgamana, true Brahmin reached to perfection,
Praise be to Kassapa, in every way set free,
Praise be to Aïgãrasa, the glorious son of the Sakyas,
He who taught this Dhamma for dispelling all dukkha.
All of them quenched of passion for the world by clearly seeing it
as it truly is,
They, of gentle speech, mighty ones of ripe wisdom.
Praise be to Gotama who is for the benefit of devas and humans,
Perfect in knowledge and conduct; mighty one of ripe wisdom,
Perfect in knowledge and conduct; we revere the Buddha
Gotama.
I pay homage to all the Buddhas who have arisen, great sages,
Taõhaïkara the great hero, Medhaïkara of great renown,
Saranaïkara the world-benefitter, Dãpaïkara the resplendent,
Koõóa¤¤o, liberator of the people, Maïgalo, a leader among
men,
Sumano, glad and wise, Revato, increaser of joy,
Sobhito, abounding in merit, Anomadassã, highest of people,

udapàdi. Taÿ kho pan’idaÿ dukkha-samudayo ariyasaccaÿ pahãnan-ti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu
dhammesu, cakkhuÿ udapàdi ¤àõaÿ udapàdi pa¤¤à
udapàdi vijjà udapàdi àloko udapàdi.
Idaÿ dukkha-nirodho ariya-saccan-ti me bhikkhave, pubbe
ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuÿ udapàdi ¤àõaÿ
udapàdi pa¤¤à udapàdi vijjà udapàdi àloko udapàdi. Taÿ
kho pan’idaÿ dukkha-nirodho ariya-saccaÿ
sacchikàtabban-ti me bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu
dhammesu, cakkhuÿ udapàdi ¤àõaÿ udapàdi pa¤¤à
udapàdi vijjà udapàdi àloko udapàdi. Taÿ kho pan’idaÿ
dukkha-nirodho ariya-saccaÿ sacchikatan-ti me
bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuÿ
udapàdi ¤àõaÿ udapàdi pa¤¤à udapàdi vijjà udapàdi
àloko udapàdi.
Idaÿ dukkha-nirodha-gàminã-pañipadà ariya-saccan-ti me
bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuÿ
udapàdi ¤àõaÿ udapàdi pa¤¤à udapàdi vijjà udapàdi
àloko udapàdi. Taÿ kho pan’idaÿ dukkha-nirodhagàminã-pañipadà ariya-saccaÿ bhàvetabban-ti me
bhikkhave, pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuÿ
udapàdi ¤àõaÿ udapàdi pa¤¤à udapàdi vijjà udapàdi
àloko udapàdi. Taÿ kho pan’idaÿ dukkha-nirodhagàminã-pañipadà ariya-saccaÿ bhàvitan-ti me bhikkhave,
pubbe ananussutesu dhammesu, cakkhuÿ udapàdi ¤àõaÿ
udapàdi pa¤¤à udapàdi vijjà udapàdi àloko udapàdi.
[Yàva-kãva¤-ca me bhikkhave] imesu catåsu ariya-saccesu,
evan-ti-parivaññaÿ dvà-das’àkàraÿ yathà-bhåtaÿ

uppajjati vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ và dukkhaÿ và
adukkham-asukhaÿ và, tasmiÿ pi nibbindati.
I did not declare the realisation of incomparable, perfect
enlightenment to the world with its Devas, Màras and
Brahmas, and to the mass of beings with its Gods and
Humans. But when, bhikkhus, my knowledge and vision of
reality regarding these four noble truths in three phases—
these twelve aspects—was fully clear to me, I declared the
realisation of incomparable, perfect enlightenment to the
world with its Devas, Màras and Brahmas, and to the mass
of beings with its Gods and humans. Moreover, the
knowledge and vision arose in me: “Unshakeable is my
deliverance. This is the last birth. Now there is no more
becoming for me.”
This is what the Blessed One said. The group of five
bhikkhus were glad at heart and approved of the words of
the Blessed One. Now during this discourse, the passionless, pure seeing of the truth appeared to the Venerable
Konda¤¤a: everything that has the characteristic of arising
has the characteristic of ceasing.
When the Wheel of Dhamma had thus been set rolling by
the Blessed One, the Devas of the earth raised the cry: “In
the Deer Park at Isipatana, near Baranasi, the unsurpassed
Wheel of Dhamma has been set rolling by the Blessed One,
and no recluse, Deva, Màra, Brahma, or other being in the
world can stop it.” The Deva-kings of the four quarters,
hearing the cry of the Devas of the earth, also raised the
cry; the Devas of the Thirty-Three, hearing the cry of the
Deva-kings of the four quarters, also raised the cry;

Jivhàya pi nibbindati. Rasesu pi nibbindati.
Jivhà-vi¤¤àõe pi nibbindati. Jivhà-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaÿ jivhà-samphassa- paccayà
uppajjati vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ và dukkhaÿ và
adukkham-asukhaÿ và, tasmiÿ pi nibbindati.
Kàyasmiÿ pi nibbindat. Phoññhabbesu pi nibbindati.
Kàya-vi¤¤àõe pi nibbindati. Kàya-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaÿ kàya-samphassa-paccayà
uppajjati vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ và dukkhaÿ và
adukkham-asukhaÿ và, tasmiÿ pi nibbindati.
Manasmiÿ pi nibbindati. Dhammesu pi nibbindati.
Mano-vi¤¤àõe pi nibbindati. Mano-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaÿ mano-samphassa-paccayà
uppajjati vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ và dukkhaÿ và
adukkham-asukhaÿ và, tasmiÿ pi nibbindati.
Nibbindaÿ virajjati. Viràgà vimuccati. Vimuttasmiÿ
vimuttam-iti ¤àõaÿ hoti.
‘Khãõà jàti, vusitaÿ brahma-cariyaÿ, kataÿ karaõãyaÿ,
nàparaÿ itthattàyà-ti’ pajànàtã-ti.”
Idam-avoca Bhagavà. Attamanà te bhikkhå Bhagavato
bhàsitaÿ abhinanduÿ. Imasmi¤-ca pana
veyyàkaraõasmiÿ bha¤¤amàne, tassa bhikkhusahassassa anupàdàya, àsavehi cittàni vimucciÿså-ti.
âditta-pariyàya Sutta Niññhitaÿ.

impressions received by the nose; no longer fascinated
by the tongue, by tastes, by tongue-consciousness by impressions received by the tongue, or by whatever feeling,
pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant,
that arises conditioned by impressions received by the
tongue; no longer fascinated by the mind, by the things of
the mind, by mind-consciousness, by impressions received
by the mind, or by whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant,
or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, that arises conditioned by impressions received by the mind.
With the ending of fascination there is dispassion; having
abandoned passion, there is liberation; and with liberation
there is the realisation of freedom. The understanding
arises: “Birth is exhausted, and the Holy Life has been lived
out; what is to be done is done, there is no more of this to
come.”
This is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were glad
and approved of his words. Now, during this discourse the
hearts of those thousand bhikkhus were liberated from
taints through clinging no more.
Here ends The Fire Sermon

¤àõa-dassanaÿ na suvisuddhaÿ ahosi, n’eva tàvàhaÿ
bhikkhave sadevake loke samàrake sabrahmake,
sassamaõa-bràhmaõiyà pajàya sadeva-manussàya,
anuttaraÿ sammà-sambodhiÿ abhi-sambuddho
pacca¤¤àsiÿ. Yato ca kho me bhikkhave imesu catåsu
ariya-saccesu, evan-ti-parivaññaÿ dvà-das’àkàraÿ
yathàbhåtaÿ ¤àõa-dassanaÿ suvisuddhaÿ ahosi,
athàhaÿ bhikkhave sadevake loke samàrake sabrahmake,
sassamaõa-bràhmaõiyà pajàya sadeva-manussàya,
anuttaraÿ sammà- sambodhiÿ abhisambuddho
pacca¤¤àsiÿ, ¤àõa¤-ca pana me dassanaÿ udapàdi:
akuppà me vimutti, ayam-antimà jàti, n’atthi dàni
punabbhavo-ti.” Idam-avoca Bhagavà. Attamanà pa¤cavaggiyà bhikkhå Bhagavato bhàsitaÿ abhinanduÿ.
Imasmi¤-ca pana veyyàkaraõasmiÿ bha¤¤amàne,
âyasmato Koõóa¤¤assa virajaÿ vãta-malaÿ dhammacakkhuÿ udapàdi. Yaï-ki¤ci samudaya- dhammaÿ
sabban-taÿ nirodha-dhamman-ti.
[Pavattite ca Bhagavatà] dhamma-cakke, bhummà devà
saddam-anussàvesuÿ: “Etam-Bhagavatà Bàràõasiyaÿ
Isipatane Migadàye anuttaraÿ dhamma-cakkaÿ
pavattitaÿ, appañivattiyaÿ samaõena và bràhmaõena và
devena và màrena và brahmunà và kenaci và lokasminti.” Bhummànaÿ devànaÿ saddaÿ sutvà, Càtummahàràjikà devà saddam-anussàvesuÿ. Càtummahà-ràjikànaÿ
devànaÿ saddaÿ sutvà, Tàvatiÿsà devà saddamanussàvesuÿ. Tàvatiÿsànaÿ devànaÿ saddaÿ sutvà,
Yàmà devà saddam-anussàvesuÿ. Yàmànaÿ devànaÿ

the Yàma Devas, hearing the cry of the Devas of the
Thirty-Three, also raised the cry; the Devas of Delight,
hearing the cry of the Yàma Devas, also raised the cry; the
Devas of Creativity, hearing the cry of the Devas of Delight,
also raised the cry; the Devas Who Delight in the Work of
Other Devas, hearing the cry of the Devas of Creativity, also
raised the cry; the Devas attendant on the Brahma Gods,
hearing the cry of the Devas Who Delight in the Work of
Other Devas, also raised the cry: “In the Deer Park at
Isipatana, near Baranasi, the unsurpassed Wheel of
Dhamma has been set rolling by the Blessed One, and
no recluse, Deva, Mara, Brahma, or other being in the
world can stop it.”
Thus in a moment, in a flash, at that very hour, word of the
turning of the Wheel of Dhamma soared up to the realm of
the Brahma Gods and this ten-thousandfold world system
shook and rocked and quaked; and a boundless, sublime
radiance surpassing the glory of the Devas appeared on
earth. Then the Blessed One made the utterance: ‘Truly,
Konda¤¤a has understood, Konda¤¤a has understood.”
Thus it was that Venerable Konda¤¤a got the name,
‘Konda¤¤a-who-understands.’
Here ends the Discourse on
Setting in Motion the Wheel of the Dhamma

Kena àdittaÿ? âdittaÿ ràg’agginà dos’agginà
moh’agginà, àdittaÿ jàtiyà jarà-maraõena, sokehi
paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upàyàsehi àdittan-ti
vadàmi.
Mano àditto. Dhammà àdittà. Mano-vi¤¤àõaÿ àdittaÿ.
Mano-samphasso àditto. Yam-p’idaÿ manosamphassa-paccayà uppajjati vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ và
dukkhaÿ và adukkham-asukhaÿ và, tam-pi àdittaÿ.
Kena àdittaÿ? âdittaÿ ràg’agginà dos’agginà
moh’agginà, àdittaÿ jàtiyà jarà-maraõena, sokehi
paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upàyàsehi àdittan-ti
vadàmi.
[Evaÿ passaÿ bhikkhave] sutavà ariya-sàvako,
cakkhusmiÿ pi nibbindati. Råpesu pi nibbindati.
Cakkhu-vi¤¤àõe pi nibbindati. Cakkhu-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaÿ cakkhu-samphassa-paccayà
uppajjati vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ và dukkhaÿ và
adukkham-asukhaÿ và, tasmiÿ pi nibbindati.
Sotasmiÿ pi nibbindati. Saddesu pi nibbindati.
Sota-vi¤¤àõe pi nibbindati. Sota-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaÿ sota-samphassa-paccayà
uppajjati vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ và dukkhaÿ và
adukkham-asukhaÿ và, tasmiÿ pi nibbindati.
Ghànasmiÿ pi nibbindati. Gandhesu pi nibbindati.
Ghàna-vi¤¤àõe pi nibbindati. Ghàna-samphasse pi
nibbindati. Yam-p’idaÿ ghàna-samphassa-paccayà

Burning with what? Burning with the fire of greed, with
the fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion; it is burning
with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief and despair, I declare.
The mind is burning, the things of the mind are burning,
mind-consciousness is burning, impressions received by
the mind are burning, and whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, conditioned
by impressions received by the mind, that too is burning.
Burning with what? Burning with the fire of greed, with
the fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion; it is burning
with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief and despair, I declare.
Bhikkhus, a Noble Disciple who has listened well, sees this,
and is no longer fascinated by the eye, by forms, by eyeconsciousness, by impressions received by the eye, or by
whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, that arises conditioned by impressions
received by the eye; no longer fascinated by the ear, by
sounds, by ear-consciousness, by impressions received by
the ear, or by whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or
neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, that arises conditioned
by impressions received by the ear; no longer fascinated by
the nose, by odours, by olfactory- consciousness, by impressions received by the nose, or by whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neither- pleasant-nor-unpleasant, that
arises conditioned by

saddaÿ sutvà, Tusità devà saddam-anussàvesuÿ.
Tusitànaÿ devànaÿ saddaÿ sutvà, Nimmàna-ratã devà
saddam-anussàvesuÿ. Nimmàna-ratãnaÿ devànaÿ
saddaÿ sutvà, Para-nimmita-vasa-vattã devà
saddam-anussàvesuÿ. Para-nimmita-vasa-vattãnaÿ
devànaÿ saddaÿ sutvà, Brahma-kàyikà devà saddamanussàvesuÿ: “Etam-Bhagavatà Bàràõasiyaÿ Isipatane
Migadàye anuttaraÿ dhamma-cakkaÿ pavattitaÿ,
appañivattiyaÿ samaõena và bràhmaõena và devena và
màrena và brahmunà và kenaci và lokasmin-ti.”
Iti-ha tena khaõena tena muhuttena, yàva brahma-lokà
saddo abbhuggacchi. Aya¤-ca dasa-sahassã loka-dhàtu,
saïkampi sampakampi sampavedhi. Appamàõo ca oëàro
obhàso loke pàtur-ahosi, atikkamm’eva devànaÿ
dev’ànubhàvaÿ.
Atha kho Bhagavà udànaÿ udànesi: “A¤¤àsi vata bho
Koõóa¤¤o, a¤¤àsi vata bho Koõóa¤¤o-ti.” Iti-h’idaÿ
àyasmato Koõóa¤¤assa, A¤¤à-koõóa¤¤o’tv-eva nàmaÿ,
ahosã-ti.
Dhamma-cakkappavattana Suttaÿ Niññhitaÿ.

Anatta-lakkhaõa Sutta
Solo Introduction:
All beings should take pains to understand the characteristic of anattà—non-self—which provides matchless deliverance from self-belief and self-perception
as taught by the supreme Buddha. This teaching is for
the perfect comprehension of meditators of perceived
truths, for the development of perfect knowledge of
these perceived phenomena, and for the investigation
with understanding of all defiled mind-moments. The
consequence of this is total deliverance, and desirous
of bringing this teaching out with its great benefit, let
us now recite this sutta.

The Discourse on the Characteristic
of Non-self
Thus have I heard: Once the Blessed One was staying in
the Deer Park at Isipatana, near Baranasi. There the
Blessed One addressed the group of five bhikkhus:
Bhikkhus, form is not self. If form were self, then this form
would not tend to affliction, and one could say of form:
“Let my form be thus, let my form be not thus.” Indeed,
bhikkhus, it is since form is not self that it leads to affliction, and none can have it of form: “Let my form be thus,
let my form be not thus.”
Bhikkhus, feelings are not self. If feelings were self, then
feelings would not tend to affliction, and one could say of
feelings:

Yam-p’idaÿ sota-samphassa-paccayà uppajjati
vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ và dukkhaÿ và adukkham-asukhaÿ
và, tam-pi àdittaÿ.
Kena àdittaÿ? âdittaÿ ràg’agginà dos’agginà
moh’agginà, àdittaÿ jàtiyà jarà-maraõena, sokehi
paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upàyàsehi àdittan-ti
vadàmi.
Ghànaÿ àdittaÿ. Gandhà àdittà. Ghàna- vi¤¤àõaÿ
àdittaÿ. Ghàna-samphasso àditto. Yam-p’idaÿ
ghàna-samphassa-paccayà uppajjati vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ
và dukkhaÿ và adukkham-asukhaÿ và, tam-pi àdittaÿ.
Kena àdittaÿ? âdittaÿ ràg’agginà dos’agginà
moh’agginà, àdittaÿ jàtiyà jarà-maraõena, sokehi
paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upàyàsehi àdittan-ti
vadàmi.
Jivhà àdittà. Rasà àdittà. Jivhà-vi¤¤àõaÿ àdittaÿ.
Jivhà-samphasso àditto. Yam-p’idaÿ
jivhà-samphassa-paccayà uppajjati vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ
và dukkhaÿ và adukkham-asukhaÿ và, tam-pi àdittaÿ.
Kena àdittaÿ? âdittaÿ ràg’agginà dos’agginà
moh’agginà, àdittaÿ jàtiyà jarà-maraõena, sokehi
paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upàyàsehi àdittan-ti
vadàmi.
Kàyo àditto. Phoññhabbà àdittà. Kàya- vi¤¤àõaÿ
àdittaÿ. Kàya-samphasso àditto. Yam-p’idaÿ
kàya-samphassa-paccayà uppajjati vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ
và dukkhaÿ và adukkham-asukhaÿ và, tam-pi àdittaÿ.

Anatta-lakkhaõa Sutta
Solo Introduction:
and whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neitherpleasant-nor-unpleasant, conditioned by impressions received
by the ear, that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning
with the fire of greed, with the fire of aversion, with the fire
of delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief
and despair, I declare.
The nose is burning, odours are burning, olfactory-consciousness is burning, impressions received by the nose are
burning, and whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, conditioned by impressions
received by the nose, that too is burning. Burning with
what? Burning with the fire of greed, with the fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief and despair, I declare.
The tongue is burning, tastes are burning, taste-consciousness is burning, impressions received by the tongue are
burning, and whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, conditioned by impressions
received by the tongue, that too is burning. Burning with
what? Burning with the fire of greed, with the fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion; it is burning with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief and despair, I declare.
The body is burning, tactile objects are burning, body-consciousness is burning, impressions received by the body are
burning, and whatever feeling, pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, conditioned by impressions
received by the body, that too is burning.

Yantaÿ sattehi dukkhena

¥eyyaÿ anattalakkhaõaÿ

Attavàdàttasa¤¤àõaÿ

Sammadeva vimocanaÿ

Sambuddho taÿ pakàsesi

Diññhasaccàna yoginaÿ

Uttariÿ pañivedhàya

Bhàvetuÿ ¤àõamuttamaÿ

Yantesaÿ diññhadhammànaÿ ¥àõenupaparikkhataÿ
Sabbàsavehi cittàni

Vimucciÿsu asesato

Tathà ¤àõànusàrena

Sàsanaÿ kàtumicchataÿ

Sàdhånaÿ atthasiddhatthaÿ Taÿ suttantaÿ bhaõàma se.

Anatta-lakkhaõa Sutta
[Evam-me sutaÿ.] Ekaÿ samayaÿ Bhagavà, Bàràõasiyaÿ
viharati Isipatane Migadàye. Tatra kho Bhagavà pa¤cavaggiye bhikkhå àmantesi:
“Råpaÿ bhikkhave anattà. Råpa¤-ca h’idaÿ bhikkhave
attà abhavissa, na-y-idaÿ råpaÿ àbàdhàya saÿvatteyya,
labbhetha ca råpe: evaÿ me råpaÿ hotu evaÿ me råpaÿ
mà ahosã-ti. Yasmà ca kho bhikkhave råpaÿ anattà, tasmà
råpaÿ àbàdhàya saÿvattati. Na ca labbhati råpe: evaÿ
me råpaÿ hotu evaÿ me råpaÿ mà ahosã-ti.
Vedanà anattà. Vedanà ca h’idaÿ bhikkhave attà
abhavissa, na-y-idaÿ vedanà àbàdhàya saÿvatteyya,
labbhetha ca vedanàya: evaÿ me vedanà hotu evaÿ me
vedanà mà ahosã-ti. Yasmà ca kho bhikkhave vedanà
anattà, tasmà vedanà àbàdhàya saÿvattati. Na ca labbhati

Solo Introduction:
“Let my feelings be thus, let my feelings be not thus.”
Indeed, bhikkhus, it is since feelings are not self that they
lead to affliction, and none can have it of feelings: “Let my
feelings be thus, let my feelings be not thus.”
Bhikkhus, perception is not self. If perception were self,
then perception would not tend to affliction, and one could
say of perception: “Let perception be thus, let perception
be not thus.” Indeed, bhikkhus, it is since perception is not
self that it leads to affliction, and none can have it of
perception: “Let perception be thus, let it not be thus.”
Bhikkhus, mental formations are not self. If mental formations were self, then mental formations would not tend to
affliction, and one could say of mental formations: “Let my
mental formations be thus, let my mental formations be
not thus.” Indeed, bhikkhus, it is since mental formations
are not self that they lead to affliction, and none can have it
of mental formations: “Let my mental formations be thus,
let my mental formations be not thus.”
Bhikkhus, consciousness is not self. If consciousness were
self, then consciousness would not tend to affliction, and
one could say of consciousness: “Let my consciousness be
thus, let my consciousness not be thus.” Indeed, bhikkhus,
it is since consciousness is not self that it leads to affliction,
and none can have it of consciousness: “Let my consciousness be thus, let my consciousness not be thus.”
What do you think, bhikkhus, is form permanent or impermanent? “Impermanent, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, is it satisfactory or unsatisfactory? “Unsatisfactory, Venerable Sir.”

Veneyyadamanopàye

Sabbaso pàramiÿ gato

Amoghavacano Buddho

Abhi¤¤àyànusàsako

Ciõõànuråpato càpi

Dhammena vinayaÿ pajaÿ

Ciõõàggipàricariyànaÿ

Sambojjhàrahayoginaÿ

Yamàdittapariyàyaÿ

Desayanto manoharaÿ

Te sotàro vimocesi

Asekkhàya vimuttiyà

Tathevopaparikkhàya

Vi¤¤åõaÿ sotumicchataÿ

Dukkhatàlakkhaõopàyaÿ

Taÿ suttantaÿ bhaõàma se.

âditta-pariyàya Sutta
[Evam-me sutaÿ.] Ekaÿ samayaÿ Bhagavà, Gayàyaÿ
viharati gayàsãse, saddhiÿ bhikkhu-sahassena. Tatra kho
Bhagavà bhikkhå àmantesi:
“Sabbaÿ bhikkhave àdittaÿ. Ki¤-ca bhikkhave sabbaÿ
àdittaÿ? Cakkhuÿ bhikkhave àdittaÿ. Råpà àdittà.
Cakkhu-vi¤¤àõaÿ àdittaÿ. Cakkhu-samphasso àditto.
Yam-p’idaÿ cakkhu-samphassa-paccayà uppajjati
vedayitaÿ, sukhaÿ và dukkhaÿ và adukkham-asukhaÿ
và, tam-pi àdittaÿ.
Kena àdittaÿ? âdittaÿ ràg’agginà dos’agginà moh’agginà,
àdittaÿ jàtiyà jarà-maraõena, sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi
domanassehi upàyàsehi àdittan-ti vadàmi.
Sotaÿ àdittaÿ. Saddà àdittà. Sota-vi¤¤àõaÿ àdittaÿ.
Sota-samphasso àditto.

âditta-pariyàya Sutta
Solo Introduction:
With his skill in training the trainable, the
All-transcendent Buddha, clear speaker, teacher of
highest knowledge, he who expounds the Dhamma
and Vinaya (training) that is fitting and worthy to
the people, teaching this delightful fire-parable to
meditators of highest skill has liberated those who
listen with the liberation that needs no further
training, through the true investigation of the wise
and attentive. Let us recite this Sutta displaying the
characteristics of dukkha.

The Fire Sermon
Thus have I heard: Once the Blessed One was staying near
Gaya, on Gaya Head, together with a thousand bhikkhus.
There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus:
Bhikkhus, all things are burning. And what, bhikkhus, are
all the things that are burning? The eye is burning, forms
are burning, eye-consciousness is burning, impressions
received by the eye are burning, and whatever feeling,
pleasant, unpleasant, or neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant,
conditioned by impressions received by the eye, that too is
burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire of
greed, with the fire of aversion, with the fire of delusion; it
is burning with birth, ageing, sorrow, grief and despair, I
declare.
The ear is burning, sounds are burning, ear-consciousness
is burning, impressions received by the ear are burning,

vedanàya: evaÿ me vedanà hotu evaÿ me vedanà mà
ahosã-ti.
Sa¤¤à anattà. Sa¤¤à ca h’idaÿ bhikkhave attà
abhavissa, na-y-idaÿ sa¤¤à àbàdhàya saÿvatteyya,
labbhetha ca sa¤¤àya, evaÿ me sa¤¤à hotu evaÿ me
sa¤¤à mà ahosã-ti. Yasmà ca kho bhikkhave sa¤¤à
anattà, tasmà sa¤¤à àbàdhàya saÿvattati. Na ca
labbhati sa¤¤àya, evaÿ me sa¤¤à hotu evaÿ me sa¤¤à
mà ahosã-ti.
Saïkhàrà anattà. Saïkhàrà ca h’idaÿ bhikkhave attà
abhavissaÿsu, na-y-idaÿ saïkhàrà àbàdhàya
saÿvatteyyuÿ, labbhetha ca saïkhàresu: evaÿ me
saïkhàrà hontu evaÿ me saïkhàrà mà ahesun-ti. Yasmà
ca kho bhikkhave saïkhàrà anattà, tasmà saïkhàrà
àbàdhàya saÿvattanti. Na ca labbhati saïkhàresu: evaÿ
me saïkhàrà hontu evaÿ me saïkhàrà mà ahesun-ti.
Vi¤¤àõaÿ anattà. Vi¤¤àõa¤-ca h’idaÿ bhikkhave attà
abhavissa, na-y-idaÿ vi¤¤àõaÿ àbàdhàya saÿvatteyya,
labbhetha ca vi¤¤àõe: evaÿ me vi¤¤àõaÿ hotu evaÿ
me vi¤¤àõaÿ mà ahosã-ti. Yasmà ca kho bhikkhave
vi¤¤àõaÿ anattà, tasmà vi¤¤àõaÿ àbàdhàya
saÿvattati. Na ca labbhati vi¤¤àõe: evaÿ me vi¤¤àõaÿ
hotu evaÿ me vi¤¤àõaÿ mà ahosã-ti.
[Taÿ kiÿ ma¤¤atha bhikkhave,] råpaÿ niccaÿ và
aniccaÿ và-ti?”
“Aniccaÿ bhante.”
“Yam-panàniccaÿ dukkhaÿ và taÿ sukhaÿ và-ti?”
“Dukkhaÿ bhante.”

That which is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to
change, can it rightly be regarded thus: “This is mine, this
am I, this is my (true) self?” “No, Venerable Sir.”
What do you think, bhikkhus, is feeling permanent or
impermanent? “Impermanent, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, is it satisfactory or unsatisfactory? “Unsatisfactory, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to
change, can it rightly be regarded thus: “This is mine, this
am I, this is my (true) self?” “No, Venerable Sir.”
What do you think, bhikkhus, is perception permanent or
impermanent? “Impermanent, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, is it satisfactory or unsatisfactory? “Unsatisfactory, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to
change, can it rightly be regarded thus: “This is mine, this
am I, this is my (true) self?” “No, Venerable Sir.”
What do you think, bhikkhus, are mental formations permanent or impermanent? “Impermanent, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, is it satisfactory or unsatisfactory? “Unsatisfactory, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to
change, can it rightly be regarded thus: “This is mine, this
am I, this is my (true) self?” “No, Venerable Sir.”

Ye keci saïkhàrà atãtànàgata-paccuppannà, ajjhattà và
bahiddhà và, oëàrikà và sukhumà và, hãnà và paõãtà và,
ye dåre santike và, sabbe saïkhàrà, n’etaÿ mama
n’eso’ham-asmi na m’eso attà-ti. Evam-etaÿ
yathà-bhåtaÿ sammappa¤¤àya daññhabbaÿ.
Yaï-ki¤ci vi¤¤àõaÿ atãtànàgata-paccuppannaÿ,
ajjhattaÿ và bahiddhà và, oëàrikaÿ và sukhumaÿ và,
hãnaÿ và paõãtaÿ và, yan-dåre santike và, sabbaÿ
vi¤¤àõaÿ, n’etaÿ mama n’eso’ham-asmi na m’eso
attà-ti. Evam-etaÿ yathà-bhåtaÿ sammappa¤¤àya
daññhabbaÿ.
Evaÿ passaÿ bhikkhave sutavà ariya-sàvako, råpasmiÿ
pi nibbindati. Vedanàya pi nibbindati. Sa¤¤àya pi
nibbindati. Saïkhàresu pi nibbindati. Vi¤¤àõasmiÿ pi
nibbindati. Nibbindaÿ virajjati. Viràgà vimuccati.
Vimuttasmiÿ vimuttam-iti ¤àõaÿ hoti. ‘Khãõà jàti,
vusitaÿ brahma-cariyaÿ, kataÿ karaõãyaÿ, nàparaÿ
itthattàyà-ti’ pajànàtã-ti.”
Idam-avoca Bhagavà. Attamanà pa¤ca-vaggiyà bhikkhå
Bhagavato bhàsitaÿ abhinanduÿ. Imasmi¤-ca pana
veyyàkaraõasmiÿ bha¤¤amàne, pa¤ca-vaggiyànaÿ
bhikkhånaÿ anupàdàya, àsavehi cittàni vimucciÿså-ti.
Anatta-lakkhaõa Suttaÿ Niññhitaÿ.

Similarly, whatever are mental formations, past, future or
presently arisen, whether in oneself or external, whether
coarse or subtle, whether inferior or superior, whether far
or near, should be seen with right understanding thus:
“This is not mine, this am I not, this is not my self.”
Similarly, whatever is consciousness, past, future or
presently arisen, whether in oneself or external, whether
coarse or subtle, whether inferior or superior, whether far
or near, should be seen with right understanding thus:
“This is not mine, this am I not, this is not my self.”
Bhikkhus, a wise Noble Disciple who has listened well, sees
this, and is no longer fascinated by form, no longer fascinated by feeling, no longer fascinated by perception, no
longer fascinated by mental formations, no longer fascinated by consciousness. Becoming dispassionate, his passion fades away; with the fading of passion his heart is
liberated; when liberated there comes the knowledge: it is
liberated. He understands: birth is exhausted, the Holy Life
has been lived out, what was to be done is done, there is no
more of this to come.
This is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus of the
group of five were glad, and they delighted in his words.
Now, while this discourse was being delivered the hearts of
those five bhikkhus were liberated from taints through
clinging no more.
Here ends the Discourse
on the Characteristic of Non-self

“Yam-panàniccaÿ dukkhaÿ vipariõàma-dhammaÿ,
kallaÿ nu taÿ samanupassituÿ: Etaÿ mama
eso’ham-asmi eso me attà-ti?”
“No h’etaÿ bhante.”
Taÿ kiÿ ma¤¤atha bhikkhave, vedanà niccà và aniccà
và-ti?”
“Aniccà bhante.”
“Yam-panàniccaÿ dukkhaÿ và taÿ sukhaÿ và-ti?”
“Dukkhaÿ bhante.”
“Yam-panàniccaÿ dukkhaÿ vipariõàma-dhammaÿ,
kallaÿ nu taÿ samanupassituÿ: Etaÿ mama
eso’ham-asmi eso me attà-ti?”
“No h’etaÿ bhante.”
“Taÿ kiÿ ma¤¤atha bhikkhave, sa¤¤à niccà và aniccà
và-ti?”
“Aniccà bhante.”
“Yam-panàniccaÿ dukkhaÿ và taÿ sukhaÿ và-ti?”
“Dukkhaÿ bhante.”
“Yam-panàniccaÿ dukkhaÿ vipariõàma- dhammaÿ,
kallaÿ nu taÿ samanupassituÿ: Etaÿ mama
eso’ham-asmi eso me attà-ti?”
“No h’etaÿ bhante.”
“Taÿ kiÿ ma¤¤atha bhikkhave, saïkhàrà niccà và
aniccà và-ti?”
“Aniccà bhante.”
“Yam-panàniccaÿ dukkhaÿ và taÿ sukhaÿ và-ti?”
“Dukkhaÿ bhante.”
“Yam-panàniccaÿ dukkhaÿ vipariõàma-dhammaÿ,
kallaÿ nu taÿ samanupassituÿ:

What do you think, bhikkhus, is consciousness permanent
or impermanent? “Impermanent, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, is it satisfactory or unsatisfactory? “Unsatisfactory, Venerable Sir.”
That which is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to
change, can it rightly be regarded thus: “This is mine, this
am I, this is my (true) self?” “No, Venerable Sir.”
Therefore, bhikkhus, whatever is form, past, future or presently arisen, whether in oneself or external, whether coarse
or subtle, whether inferior or superior, whether far or near,
should be seen with right understanding thus: “This is not
mine, this am I not, this is not my self.”
Similarly, whatever are feelings, past, future or presently
arisen, whether in oneself or external, whether coarse or
subtle, whether inferior or superior, whether far or near,
should be seen with right understanding thus: “This is not
mine, this am I not, this is not my self.”
Similarly, whatever is perception, past, future or presently
arisen, whether in oneself or external, whether coarse or
subtle, whether inferior or superior, whether far or near,
should be seen with right understanding thus: “This is not
mine, this am I not, this is not my self.”

Etaÿ mama eso’ham-asmi eso me attà-ti?”
“No h’etaÿ bhante.”
“Taÿ kiÿ ma¤¤atha bhikkhave, vi¤¤àõaÿ niccaÿ và
aniccaÿ và-ti?”
“Aniccaÿ” bhante.”
“Yam-panàniccaÿ dukkhaÿ và taÿ sukhaÿ và’ti?”
“Dukkhaÿ bhante.”
“Yam-panàniccaÿ dukkhaÿ vipariõàma-dhammaÿ,
kallaÿ nu taÿ samanupassituÿ: Etaÿ mama
eso’ham-asmi eso me attà-ti?”
“No h’etaÿ bhante.”
[“Tasmà-t-iha bhikkhave,] yaï-ki¤ci råpaÿ
atãtànàgata-paccuppannaÿ, ajjhattaÿ và bahiddhà và,
oëàrikaÿ và sukhumaÿ và, hãnaÿ và paõãtaÿ và,
yan-dåre santike và, sabbaÿ råpaÿ, n’etaÿ mama
n’eso’ham-asmi na m’eso attà-ti. Evam-etaÿ
yathà-bhåtaÿ sammappa¤¤àya daññhabbaÿ.
Yà kàci vedanà atãtànàgata-paccuppannà, ajjhattà và
bahiddhà và, oëàrikà và sukhumà và, hãnà và paõãtà và,
yà dåre santike và, sabbà vedanà, n’etaÿ mama
n’eso’ham-asmi na m’eso attà-ti. Evam-etaÿ
yathà-bhåtaÿ sammappa¤¤àya daññhabbaÿ.
Yà kàci sa¤¤à atãtànàgata-paccuppannà, ajjhattà và
bahiddhà và, oëàrikà và sukhumà và, hãnà và paõãtà và,
yà dåre santike và, sabbà sa¤¤à, n’etaÿ mama
n’eso’ham-asmi na m’eso attà-ti. Evam-etaÿ
yathà-bhåtaÿ sammappa¤¤àya daññhabbaÿ.

